GENERAL
1 In April 1949 it was decided by representatives of the Canadian and United
States Governments to conduct a joint and combined exercise for the Army and Air
Forces of both countries. The exercise was to be held on the Northwest Highway
System - Alaska Highway, in February 1950 when weather conditions suitable for
testing men and equipment could be expected.
2 (a) Dates: 13 Feb 50 - 23 Feb 50.
 (b) Area: Northwest Highway System, between Whitehorse, Yukon
Territories, and Northway, Alaska.
(c) Troops Participating:
ARMY FORCES:
COMBAT TEAM A
First Battalion, 14th Infantry
Battery A, 537 Field Artillery Battalion
Collecting Platoon, Medical Company, 14th Infantry
Detachment Survey Company, 14th Infantry
1st Platoon, Heavy Mortar Company, 14th Infantry
52
229th Signal Operating Company
Company B, 21st Engineer Battalion
CIC Detachment (Provost)
45th O/A Detachment
182 P.I. Detachment
Detachment 519th MI Service Platoon
Detachment 26th Infantry Scout Dog Platoon
COMBAT TEAM B
Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry
C Troop 1 Field Regiment RCHA
Detachment 23 Field Squadron RCE
Air Supply Signal Unit
Platoon 23 Transport Company RCASC
Section 37 Field Ambulance RCAMC
Ordnance Field Park
Advanced Workshop Detachment RCEME
Section Canadian Provost Corps
 AIR FORCES:
OFFENSIVE SUPPORT WING
One Jet Fighter Squadron (F.8O)
One Flight Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron (RF.80)
One Jet Fighter Squadron (Vampires)
One Light Bomber Squadron (Mitchells)
One Fighter Squadron (Mustangs)
One Photographic Reconnaissance Squadron (Lancasters)
TRANSPORT WING
One Troop Carrier Squadron (C.54)
One Troop Carrier Elements (C.82)
One Heavy Transport Squadron (North Stars)
One Transport Squadron (112 Squadron) (Dakotas)
One Transport Squadron (435 Squadron) (Dakotas)
(d) Aim: The general aim of the exercise was to develop procedures,
doctrine, and technique for the employment of combined
Canadian and United States Armies and Air Forces operating in
the Arctic. The detailed Army aims were the following:
53
(i) The provision of arctic training for an infantry battalion
group, and the exercising of service units in support of the
operations.
(ii) The development of doctrine and technique for moving
troop units under Arctic conditions by air transport and
over the Northwest Highway System.
(iii) The determination of the adequacy of standard items of
clothing and equipment necessary for Arctic operation and
the necessity of any additional requirements.
(iv) To develop doctrine and technique for establishing a base
camp in the Arctic.
(v) To provide a detailed operational report on this exercise for
use in planning future operations, and for instruction in
Service schools.
(vi) To provide aerial photographs of all phases of employment
of army units in the Arctic for study by appropriate agencies
to determine what change in technique will best prevent
aerial observation and attack.
(vii) To provide various research agencies with a means of
furthering Arctic research.
(viii) To develop standards of logistical support for subArctic
operations.
The detailed aims of the Air Force were as follows:
(ix) To develop, test, and establish standardized doctrine,
tactics, organization and equipment for combined
operations in the Arctic.
(x) To provide air support for both Allied and Aggressor
Forces, by the utilization of:
- close tactical air support with army units,
- the provision of air transportation for rapid air
movement of ground troops,
54
- provision if air re-supply to isolated Army
elements and limited air re-supply for training
purposes,
- provision of visual and aerial photographic
reconnaissance,
- air evacuation of units and combat casualties,
- provision of air rescue personnel.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Broad planning and provisioning action should start from eighteen months to
two years before an exercise of this magnitude. Detailed planning staffs should be
organized and functioning at least six months prior to the exercise.
4 While numerous liaison visits were made between the responsible administrative
staffs and the closest co-operation existed at all times, a joint planning staff could
have settled the day-to-day problems on the spot.
5 Organization
A movement control section should form an integral part of the Administrative
Headquarters when large numbers of troops are being concentrated.
6 On arrival in the theatre of operations commanders are faced not with the build
up of morale, but rather with its maintenance under conditions of Arctic warfare.
This will depend largely on the facilities for relief which, on the end of a long line of
communication, will always be limited. Not only is relief required from fatigue but
from the squalor of confined tents, tent cooking, and the lack of water for washing.
A forward rest area is necessary.
7 A 5-man section was used during the exercise and found to be entirely
satisfactory. Where a section became reduced to the extent that it was uneconomical
for it to function as a tent group, it was divided amongst the remaining sections and
six men in a 5-man tent was not found to be unduly uncomfortable. A 5-man
section is considered the most suitable provided its fire power is increased. To put
five men into action will require an establishment of at least eight in a section when
men “left out of battle” and wastage are considered. If sections are organized on an 8-
man basis, another section is required in the platoon to absorb the additional
manpower so that the company establishment is not altered. The organization of a 
55
fourth section has many advantages; it can be used for administrative tasks and for
bringing forward the withdrawing tentage so that the fighting sections are not
depleted. By retaining the fighting group at three sections and by rotating the
administrative section, more opportunity is given for rest and an additional patrol is
provided.
8 A battery organization is necessary in order to provide sufficient artillery officers
and assistants to perform all tasks which must be done and to allow for the minimum
of reliefs.
9 Because of the reduction of efficiency of personnel in the cold, the additional
maintenance required, and the increased danger of driving on slippery surfaces, a
spare driver should be allotted to each vehicle, and workshop facilities must be
increased to allow for heated shelters for vehicles and repair crews.
10 On account of the long line of communication it is necessary to establish an
advanced Ordnance Depot in the forward base area. This must be done irrespective
of the size of the force involved in the operation, and it must carry substantial stocks
of rapid turn-over items and in addition hold a reserve of vehicles.
11 The number of umpires used should be kept to a minimum. Too many umpires
cause inefficiency and increase administrative problems. Umpire vehicles should be
of the oversnow type if oversnow operations are contemplated. Umpires should not
depend on the units for transport. Vehicles should be kept to a minimum.
12 Command and Control
Commanders at all levels must learn to appreciate the difference in time values
that apply in cold weather operations. In order to maintain morale at the level
required for effective performance, every item and every minute of the twenty-four
hours must be ordered and controlled. Double, or even treble, the time will be
required for the completion of housekeeping duties, care of equipment and for the
conduct of operations.
13 Offensive Support
If possible the air supremacy stage of an operation should be concluded in time to
give the ground troops full benefit of air support, and on future exercises advantage
would be obtained if time could be given for the preparation of a coordinated
air/ground attack making full use of the ACT, immediate support, photo
reconnaissance of the enemy positions and ground reconnaissance information.
56
14 Transport Support
Re-supply by air in the Arctic and sub-Arctic, particularly off the road, will be of
paramount importance.
15 In the North country where the road may be blocked to wheeled transport for
long periods by blizzards and drifting snow, or where the fighting troops are
travelling across country, every means of transport available may have to be used to
supply the force. This might include air dropping, glider or air landing supplies, or
transporting them by tractor train, oversnow vehicles, or even to a limited extent, by
animal transport.
16 There are certain factors affecting airborne assault under arctic conditions which
do not apply to normal warfare. Sleds will be required to move packs, ammunition
and tentage from the dropping zone. The fitting of containers to pararacks requires
more time and adequate provision should be made for this.
17 Fire Support
As artillery support in sub-arctic operations will likely be on a reduced scale, the
value of any other form of fire support is increased. In bush country such as is
encountered in the Yukon, the limited field of vision and the need for curtailing the
number of men employed on protective duties, reduces the size of the company area
in defence. Ground between company areas must therefore be covered by fire and, in
this and other defensive fire tasks, the value of mortars will be enhanced. Its high
angle of fire makes the mortar a particularly valuable weapon in close and
mountainous country where crest clearance is a problem. In both attack and defence
where more than one battalion is employed all mortars could be concentrated and
fired under the direction of an artillery mortar officer. The mortar should be carried
in an oversnow vehicle to increase its mobility.
18 Great difficulty was experienced in getting vehicles and guns into positions off the
road. This was caused by both deep snow and rough ground. Often guns were put
into action on the road and then manhandled into position when the area had been
cleared by bulldozers or work parties. The problem of crest clearance arose
constantly, and accentuated the requirement for a gun which can fire in the upper
registry.
19 An attempt was made to blow gun pits with explosive but proved unsatisfactory.
The alternative of building up pits by making a wall of snow then building a log wall
on each side, and packing more snow in between was used in other positions. To be
effective these walls would have to be from six to eight feet thick, the estimated time 
57
of preparation being from three to five hours. A bulldozer would be most useful in
this task reducing the time considerably.
20 Tank Support
The reduced mobility of infantry, and the consequently prolonged period which
must elapse between the cessation of artillery support and the arrival of the infantry
on the objective, necessitates the much closer support which can be given by tanks in
direct fire tasks. Use of the heavier tanks in support of infantry will give improved
offensive power but on the availability of a road line of communication. Previous
experience has shown that tanks can be used on almost any type of terrain and there
are few places along the Alaska Highway they could not be employed provided that
time was available for getting them into position.
21 Engineer Support
In operations in the Yukon and Alaska, on the axis of the Northwest Highway
System in addition to normal functions Engineers may be employed on the following
tasks:
(a) Reconnaissance and reinforcement of ice crossings.
(b) Maintenance of the highway, involving snow clearance, de-icing of the
highway and normal bridge and road maintenance.
(c) Preparation of air strips on frozen lakes and rivers for air OP, fighter and
air supply.
(d) Preparation of roads and tracks through virgin snow.
(e) Preparation of warm bases and erection of temporary buildings.
22 Reconnaissance
The country in the Yukon and Alaska along the axis of the Northwest Highway
System lends itself particularly to ambush and delaying tactics. The necessity for
adequate reconnaissance ahead of an advancing column is therefore emphasized.
Reconnaissance troops require armoured protection and oversnow mobility in order
to carry out their task. Engineers moving with reconnaissance elements will also
require oversnow vehicles and a bulldozer for the clearance of snow or road obstacles.
An air OP will be of great assistance; flank protection can also be provided by air
reconnaissance.
58
23 The necessity for previous detailed reconnaissance is increased in Arctic warfare,
in order to avoid delay, misdirection of effort and the subsequent exposure of troops
to cold and fatigue. Reconnaissance will include the preparation of trails to assist in
subsequent movement either in attack or withdrawal and the additional time required
for reconnaissance under Arctic conditions must be allowed for.
24 Throughout the exercise the lack of the carrier platoon or some lightly armoured
reconnaissance element was strongly felt. Its deficiency caused many casualties and
slowed all movement. In moving across country Penguins used in the reconnaissance
role were exposed to unnecessary risk and loss. A lightly armoured, oversnow and
airportable vehicle must be developed for the carrier platoon.
25 Mobility
Cross country movement of troops is restricted by deep snow, deadfall, heavy
woods and rough terrain and the number of troops which could be effectively
employed in any one action is therefore limited.
26 Travel by tracked vehicles and on foot along the frozen streams and lakes is
practicable. Wheeled vehicles are, in the majority of instances, completely
roadbound.
27 Primarily, operations will be from an established airbase to secure a new forward
base for operations. In effect, these operations would be similar to the island-hopping
tactics of World War II.
28 Movement by night is practicable. It imposes no greater hardship than
movement by day and snow reflects sufficient light to permit control of transport and
troop movement while, at the same time, visibility is insufficient for the execution of
detailed observed fire.
29 Because of the long line of communication from Edmonton, Alta., and
Vancouver, BC, operations in the Yukon must be supported from an advanced base
in the Whitehorse Area. The Northwest Highway System is served by:
(a) The Northern Alberta Railway from Edmonton to railhead at Dawson
Creek, BC, where the Highway to the Yukon and Alaska begins.
(b) Narrow gauge rail between Skagway, Alaska and Whitehorse.
59
(c) The Haines road (summer use only at present) which joins the main
Highway at Mile 1016. (Skagway and Haines are served by boat from
Vancouver and Seattle.)
(d) A four-inch pipe line between Skagway and Whitehorse and thence to
Fairbanks, Alaska. A subsidiary three-inch pipe line runs from
Whitehorse to Watson Lake, three hundred miles to the Southeast.
(e) The Highway is paralleled by the Northwest Staging Route with
sufficient airfields and landing strips to sustain heavy air traffic.
All these facilities provide the means for supporting forces which might be expected
to operate in this area.
30 Movement on foot will be slow and the distance covered on skis or snowshoes
probably not more than six miles in a day. Both skis and snowshoes are required for
the varying conditions of snow and types of terrain to be traversed. Skis are best in
open country, even in soft snow, especially when trail breaking vehicles can precede
the infantry. In bush country snowshoes are more suitable.
31 Movement on wheels will be limited to the road, and the ease with which vehicles
can be ambushed or delayed may make wheeled movement a slow process. Mobility
may be considered the first principle of Arctic or sub-Arctic warfare and true mobility
can only be obtained by the possession of oversnow vehicles.
32 The method of movement of both troops and supplies when on wheeled transport
will be by bounds behind a mobile oversnow covering force, and will be by picking
up, carrying forward, unloading and returning during the night. Transport must
have a protected and prepared dispersal area from which to operate.
33 The hauling of sleds slows up movement so much that it is not recommended and
the only alternative is to bring up tentage in oversnow vehicles, which may prejudice
the surprise effect of the movement. Two methods of bringing up packs and tent
loads were tried on this exercise. The first method was with the one-man toboggan
loaded with rations and cooking kit, and the two-man toboggan with packs. The
two-man toboggan was found to be too heavy, was discarded and used only for the
removal of casualties. The second method was the use of two one-man toboggans
only, the men carrying their packs. Toboggans were hauled to the forming-up place
by the reserve platoons and were left there together with the men’s packs while the
assault was mounted. This proved such hard work that in subsequent operations the
toboggans were brought up on vehicles after the attack.
60
34 Where movement is on a single road axis, such as the Northwest Highway
System, where wheeled transport can be used, there will be no need to change the
present system of supply although on occasion improvisation may be necessary. On
account of vulnerability to air attack, vehicles may have to move up, unload, and
return at night to the administrative area where there will be adequate dispersal
facilities and anti-aircraft protection.
35 Movement
Given air superiority the Northwest Highway System can be used for the
movement and employment of troops, supplies and equipment.
36 Concentration of troops and supplies in the Yukon and Alaska is feasible with
existing air, road, rail and water facilities.
37 Assault Tactics
Guerrilla tactics can be effectively employed by small groups operating along the
enemy’s line of communication.
38 A proportion of armour should be included in any force detailed to operate in the
north. This is necessary in order to provide reconnaissance and close support for
infantry. Armoured action may be carried out in some localities.
39 The principles to be considered in the advance to contact do not differ from those
which apply in normal circumstances. It is only where they are ignored that the
nature of the country and climate are likely to make the result disastrous. Advance to
contact must be carried out under cover of a protective force which must be fully
mobile, have oversnow ability and requires to be armoured, or lightly armoured if
airportable. It must have sufficient fire power to eliminate minor opposition.
40 The assault will be best delivered at night, when the efficiency of the enemy is at
its lowest because of being concentrated in tents, and owing to the impaired alertness
of sentries. Surprise becomes such an important factor that it may be preferable to
deliver the assault without previous artillery support. The assault should be made
down-wind if at all possible, as it will materially assist the attacker and add to the
problems of the defender. Sentries will normally have their backs to the wind. It
may be necessary to wear skis or snowshoes for the actual assault but troops will
generally prefer to discard them if the going permits.
41 On arrival on the position troops heated in the attack will be more liable to the
effects of cold. In consolidation it will be necessary to bring up tentage and packs. 
61
Care must be taken not to weaken the troops on the objective in carrying out such
tasks to the point that they are unable to withstand counter attack.
42 A night drop is feasible, but as no suitable parachute for a leg kit bag has been
developed, consideration must be given to the time men will be exposed to the cold
without protection. Although some casualty bags will be dropped for wounded, a
complete drop is impractical at night because of the difficulty in finding equipment
before moving off. Night drops, therefore, require timing so that sleds and
equipment can be dropped and picked up in daylight.
43 In all airborne assaults the prime requisite is the seizure and preparation of a
landing strip to permit the air landing of follow-up troops, equipment and supplies,
and also provide for the evacuation of casualties.
44 Where a force relies on a single line of communication and where its axis passes
through defiles or bush and forest, as is the case of the Northwest Highway System, it
is particularly susceptible to guerilla action. One of the first necessities of this type of
action is that there should be local inhabitants who are capable of being organized as
guerillas and who, by their knowledge of the country, are capable of rapid
concentration at the point of attack and rapid dispersal thereafter. On dispersal it is
important that they should leave no trace of their movement.
45 Action against the enemy line of communication should take the form of raids
against specific objectives, the raiding force being completely withdrawn as soon as
possible after the attack. Such a force can be night-landed or dropped on a lake
adjacent to the target and can move by ski or snowshoe to the attack. No particular
risk is involved until the attack is carried out and several days might elapse before a
favourable opportunity presented itself. Once the attack has been delivered the force
can be followed up either by air reconnaissance or on foot. Attacks could be delivered
against bridges, or against enemy aircraft on landing grounds in the same manner as
those so successfully carried out by Special Service patrols in the desert.
46 The dependence of the enemy on tents and vehicles for survival and the
importance of destroying his gun positions offer suitable objectives for armoured
assault if outflanking movement can be effected. The country lends itself to the
employment of close range recoilless anti-tank weapons. The effectiveness of
armoured assault will therefore depend largely on the degree of surprise which can be
obtained and the extent of development and employment by the enemy of recoilless
weapons.
62
47 Patrols
Owing to the difficulty of control imposed by the effects of cold and fatigue, a
small patrol is more efficient than a large one and, except for a specific task, should
not exceed five men. Smaller patrols would be subjected to greater fatigue in trail
breaking.
48 The evacuation of a patrol casualty presents increased difficulty and it may be
necessary for a patrol to take a small sled for evacuation. Patrols should carry a
survival kit in case they are forced to stay out.
49 The snow camouflage dress and the lowered efficiency of enemy on protective
duties favour the action of patrols at night, particularly if they can take advantage of
wind in their approach.
50 Defence
Operations along a single axis such as the Northwest Highway System must
inevitably invite interruption in the form of flank attacks. These can readily be
undertaken by relatively small hostile elements using guerrilla tactics. Portions of a
force extending along this route thus frequently and easily may become isolated and
subject to defeat in detail. Retention of the airfields and airstrips for purpose of aerial
re-supply therefore becomes of paramount importance.
51 A large anti-aircraft component must be included in any force which operates
along a single line of communication. Light anti-aircraft is of prime importance as
low flying fighter bomber aircraft must be frequently engaged. Unit anti-aircraft
resources must also be increased. Anti-aircraft protection can be provided only by
guns in site since these attacks are swift and sudden and no time is available to get
equipment into action.
52 Owing to the vulnerability of men sleeping in tents a company is the smallest
force which can make itself secure while affording troops the maximum rest. To
maintain control, company areas will have to be small and compact. Defence will
therefore be based on company areas which should be inter-supporting. Ground and
approaches between company areas will be covered by defensive fire of artillery,
mortars and medium machine guns. Perimeter wire must be put out and fire lanes
arranged.
53 When in contact with the enemy one third of the company must be actually
dressed and ready for action, either in their tents on sentry, or on listening post duty.
One third will be dressed but with boots off and sleeping, and one third will be off 
63
duty. The degree of readiness maintained is necessary owing to the delay incurred in
getting dressed and turning out in the cold and in the dark.
54 The best protection will be adequate dispersion. One angledozer per company
group is required to facilitate proper dispersion. The preparation of areas will take
time, about two hours per company and strict road and traffic discipline must be
maintained until they are ready.
55 The alternation of wooded areas and expanses of lakes, muskeg and riverbeds,
afford particular advantage to MMG defence. The location and destruction of such
positions would be the primary task of tanks.
56 Counter attack has additional chances of success owing to the exposure of the
enemy to cold on consolidation and reduction of fighting power in bringing up tents
and other maintenance duties. Trails should be well broken in preparation for
counter attack tasks.
57 Withdrawal
On the axis of the Northwest Highway System the frequent and excellent
delaying positions will give many opportunities for successful rearguard actions, and
will allow time for the main body to occupy and prepare its main position. The
degree of delay which can be imposed by a comparatively small force will largely
depend on the enemy’s oversnow mobility and the possibility of flank movement.
58 Withdrawal will best be effected by night when enemy reaction will be slowest.
Trails should be broken from positions before withdrawal commences and may be
booby-trapped as rear parties leave. Mines may be extensively employed.
59 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
In the Yukon and Alaska camouflage from ground observation is comparatively
simple, provided that it is combined with intelligent appreciation of the background.
The existing colours of protective clothing and tents, and the olive drab and white
disruptive camouflage of vehicles are considered suitable.
60 The camouflage of vehicles and tents from the air presents a far greater problem
which is aggravated by the initial impossibility of concealing tracks, and the clouds of
condensation from running vehicle engines. An all-white camouflage for vehicles
may be better than the disruptive paint, as in bush country during static periods
natural camouflage can be used. Although tracks cannot be effectively concealed, 
64
strict track discipline is necessary about tent sites, and use should be made of
deception by making of dummy tracks, vehicles or tents.
61 Communications
Owing to the great distances and difficulties of operation, communications
personnel and equipment must be heavily augmented and thoroughly trained and
tested before commencement of operations.
62 Line communications were normal but telephone set batteries had to be kept
warm to maintain their efficiency. An oversnow line laying vehicle is required and it
is possible that light aircraft could be used for this purpose. Wireless
communications functioned efficiently provided that batteries were kept warm, but
an oversnow vehicle capable of carrying two sets is needed.
63 Extensive modifications to existing Signal vehicles are necessary for winter
operations. Vehicles and equipment must be given exhaustive operating tests prior to
the date required for use and while still near a base workshop.
64 Canadian wireless equipment will function normally when housed, together with
its power unit, in a heated vehicle. The WS C29 set operates satisfactorily even under
conditions of cold if an efficient battery charging and replacement organization is
provided. The WS C58 set is not satisfactory for use in the Arctic or sub-Arctic.
65 Efficiency will only be obtained by the perfection of a communication system
which will permit rapid tactical movement without interruption of communications.
66 Medical
The evacuation of casualties was not tested to any great degree on this exercise.
The need for immediate attention and speedy evacuation is essential in order to
maintain a high level of morale.
67 As a casualty will often be separated from his sleeping bag, it is essential that
casualty bags be provided well forward. Some two-man toboggans will be required to
move casualties to a point where they can be picked up, and these will go forward
with assaulting troops and can carry the casualty bags.
68 The provision of shelter, suitable for the temporary holding of casualties or urgent
operation is necessary both at the casualty collecting post and at the advanced
dressing station. The 5-man tent is too small. Tents hospital extending, marquees, 
65
or RCAF general purpose shelters would be more suitable. Such tents will require
Herman-Nelson type heaters.
69 Selection and Training of Personnel
Strong and forceful leadership, coupled with a high degree of man-management
are required in order to obtain the maximum from troops when operating under subArctic
conditions. Morale must be brought up to the necessary pitch by establishing
confidence in the equipment and its use and self-reliance in the mental attitude of the
individual. The effectiveness of equipment can be demonstrated in training, and the
natural fear of the cold can be overcome by acquiring confidence in one’s own ability
to withstand it.
70 It is essential that troops complete corps training and winter indoctrination prior
to being called upon to participate in northern operations. Technical personnel must
be highly skilled tradesmen. Any force required to function in the sub-Arctic must
have trained collectively under rigorous winter conditions. Every effort must be
made to promote the idea of hard living and self-sufficiency. The need for artificial
shelter by civilized men is probably the greatest factor in the loss of mobility of troops
in the Arctic. In war, as apart from training, they will have added incentive, and this
incentive and pride in being part of an Arctic force, capable of withstanding the
rigours of the Arctic, and fighting in it, should be special targets in the conditioning
programme.
71 Movement will be simplified if infantry can acquire a degree of training where
they can live out in the most severe weather, as trappers and police have done before
them, making use of strips of windproof material which can be carried and used
individually, or assembled to make some form of shelter with the help of snow and
branches. Although tentage can never be dispensed with entirely, it could then be
done without for longer periods. This is the real key to the re-establishment of
dismounted infantry mobility in the Yukon and Alaska; with time and experience
infantry may adapt themselves to this procedure.
72 Umpires should undertake pre-exercise training with troops to which they are
attached and a two day umpire course should be given before a large exercise is held.
Umpiring side should be kept to a minimum.
66
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
73 Modification to Existing Equipment
The Bren gun is too heavy for arctic warfare. A lighter LMG which can be
carried and fired as an assault weapon is needed. Such a weapon would help to
increase the mobility of the already encumbered assault troops and counteract by fire
power the proposed reduction in section man-power.
74 The rifle in use at present is too heavy and cumbersome for warfare under Arctic
conditions. The manual operation of a bolt action rifle and the charging of
magazines is difficult in extreme cold. A light semi-automatic rifle of not more than
seven pounds in weight is required.
75 Research and development must also be continued on rations, vehicles, lubricants,
personal equipment, and wireless equipment. Properly arcticized oversnow vehicles
should be developed for load-carrying, command posts, evacuation of casualties,
reconnaissance, etc. Development should be continued towards making all Arctic
equipment airportable.
76 In view of the heavy consumption of fuels and the variety of POL products now
required, vehicles, generators, stoves, etc, should if possible, be designed to use the
same fuel.
77 Suitable heated shelters are required for RCEME workshops, which can
accommodate all types of vehicles. Shelters portable armoured corps were found
satisfactory with the following exceptions:
(a) Canvas covering was of one piece construction, requiring great effort to
lift over the frame. If this canvas were fabricated in sections, it would be
much easier and less subject to tearing.
(b) Inlets should be provided for the insertion of the Herman-Nelson type
heater tube.
In forward areas where it may be impracticable to use large shelters, smaller shelters or
windshields will be required. A shelter built in sections which can be enlarged or
reduced to provide a windbreak would be suitable.
78 It was generally considered that the parka was warm although not entirely
satisfactory. Its bulk limited free movement and most users felt it could be made
lighter and longer with increased effectiveness. A lighter type such as that used by the 
67
British was suggested with a flap in the rear to sit on, vest pockets for pencils, maps
and notebook, warmer chin cover, deeper hood and stronger zipper. The inner liner
of the parka should also be windproof so that on the trail or on relatively warm days
it can be worn alone with a warm cap.
79 The mukluk is a good type of footwear but requires improvement. It has a
tendency to creep down the calf of the leg and there is insufficient support for the
arch, ankle and instep. The canvas cracks across the foot, the buckle and eyelets on
the ankle strap are difficult to manipulate even without mitts, and the zipper tends to
ice up requiring thawing before it can be used. A more durable type of canvas is
needed, a lace with very large metal eyes or loops would be better than a zipper, and a
more form fitting design would obviate the need for an ankle strap. This type of
footgear is warm and comfortable.
80 Mitts require improvement. The outer shell is good except for the fasteners at the
wrist. A more satisfactory type of fastener is required which will facilitate both
insertion and removal of the hand. The felt liner was unsatisfactory as it was both
cold and cumbersome. The mitt woolen, trigger finger, was very good. It is felt that
an outer with an improved fastener and a lighter wool liner is required, in very cold
weather or when in contact, the mitts woolen, trigger finger, can be added to provide
more insulation and to enable the man to use his weapons. Some type of harness
attaching the mitt to the parka[,] to avoid losing it, is also required. Perhaps eight to
ten inch tabs on the end of the inner parka sleeve is the answer to this problem.
81 The sleeping bag requires improvement. Bearing in mind the need for a light,
durable and compact, sleeping bag the following criticisms and suggestions are made:
(a) The zipper frequently catches in the nylon and is difficult to undo.
(b) The bag is not sufficiently insulated.
(c) The fit at the shoulders is too loose and much heat escapes.
(d) The nylon lining is cold to the touch. The inner lining should be an
insulating material such as flannel.
(e) An insulated head covering is required.
82 Pads sleeping inflatable require modification. Their insulating properties were
poor, many leaks and punctures were experienced and there was condensation
between the pad and the sleeping bag. It was difficult to stay on the pad on uneven 
68
ground. This would be partially overcome if the two outer ribs were made larger.
The light weight and compact nature of this article are advantageous.
83 The vacuum bottle was only fair. In extreme temperatures the liquid cooled
quickly and the corks and cup tops often froze up making them difficult to open. A
larger bottle with a plastic cup top would be more useful and more durable.
84 The Bearpaw type of snowshoe is not satisfactory in soft snow. They bury easily
and unless the man is an expert on them they are awkward and cumbersome. The
Trailbreaker type is preferred but improvement is necessary. It required more rise at
the toe to avoid burying the tip in the snow. It should be narrower with a large foot
aperture. Leather harness is preferred to lampwick. In both types the snowshoe was
too brittle and broke easily.
85 Improvement can be made in the tent arctic light, 5-man. The magnesium pegs
bent easily, zippers were too weak, tents were not lightproof. Some sort of floor is
required and the inner liner sags too much, reducing the living space. More anchor
points should be made.
86 Toboggans arctic one-man were too heavy to pull and the lashing points were
improperly located. The toboggan is difficult to handle in underbrush and deep
snow, and tends to bury itself when going down hill. The nylon bag was too small,
frayed easily and could not be used for lashing unless the man removed his mitts.
The British one-man toboggan, two of which may be joined to make a two-man
toboggan, was superior. The toboggans arctic two-man were not satisfactory except
for hauling casualties. They were too heavy and cumbersome in deep snow and close
country, requiring from three to five men to haul them. Men prefer carrying loads to
hauling these sleds.
87 The Coleman lamp provides ample heat and light but is quite fragile. One group
considered that less light and heat could be accepted and a more durable type of lamp
supplied.
88 New Developments Required
Consideration should be given to the development of adequate starting aids
bearing in mind that warmth for the battery, oil and engine coolant must be
provided. Although the continual operation of vehicles in static periods did not
prove as harmful as expected, the provision of starting aids is imperative.