1 A programme of summer training in northern Canada, for selected sub-units of
the Mobile Striking Force, was held in the Fort Churchill area, based upon a directive
produced by Army Headquarters.
2 (a) Dates: (i) “DEER FLY I” 1 Jun - 29 Jun 1952
(ii) “DEER FLY II” 6 Jul - 3 Aug 1952
(iii) “DEER FLY III” 10 Aug - 7 Sep 1952
(b) Area: FORT CHURCHILL and CHRISTMAS LAKE area.
127
(c) Troops Participating:
 “DEER FLY I” - Friendly Force
One reinforced pl, 2 RCR
One det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn, RC Sigs
One det Arctic P1, 18 Coy RCASC
One det AB P1, RCASC
Enemy Force
One reinforced sec, 2 RCR
“DEER FLY II” - Friendly Force
One reinforced coy, 2 PPCLI
One Tp AF Sde Gp Sigs Sqn, RC Sigs
One det Arctic Pl, 18 Coy RCASC
One det AB Pl, RCASC
One sub-sec, No 1 Airborne Med Sec, RCAMC
Enemy Force
One reinforced pl, 2 PPCLI
“DEER FLY III”- Friendly Force
One reinforced pl, 2 R 22e R
One det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn, RC Sigs
One det Arctic Pl, 18 Coy RCASC
One det AB Pl, RCASC
Enemy Force
One reinforced sec, 2 R 22e R
(d) RCAF: RCAF provided tactical and transport support as follows:
(i) 4 Jun - 5 Sep - aircraft based at Fort Churchill
(JSES Unit)
(ii) 10 Jul - 1 Aug - aircraft based at Fort Churchill,
supplemented by one Dakota.
(e) Aim: The aim of this programme was:
128
(i) To train elements of the Mobile Striking Force in their role of
reducing enemy lodgements in northern Canada over
diversified terrain.
(ii) To assess the standard of troops taking part.
(iii) To determine the personnel and equipment requirements for
future summer northern operations and training.
(f) Outline Schedule:
Each “DEER FLY” exercise conformed to the following schedule:
(i) D Day - D plus 2 - Staging in.
(ii) D plus 3 - D plus 8 - Indoctrination, including both
lectures and field work.
(iii) D plus 9 - D plus 19 - Field training to practice infantry
skills under summer Arctic
conditions.
(iv) D plus 20 - D plus 25 - Main exercise in two phases.
(v) D plus 26 - D plus 27 - Staging out.
LESSONS LEARNED
GENERAL
3 In particular, this exercise supports lessons learned on the following:
(a) “SHOO FLY I” (Original Report)
(i) environment Para 24
(ii) personnel Para 25
(iii) training Para 26
(iv) movement Para 27 (a) (b)
(v) navigation Para 30
(vi) helicopter Para 31
(vii) camouflage Para 34
129
(b) “SHOO FLY II” (Original Report)
(i) environment Para 1 (a) (e) (f)
(ii) air Para 2 excl (c)
(iii) movement Para 1 (g) (j)
(iv) camouflage Para 4
(v) medical Para 5
(vi) clothing Para 6 excl (d)
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
4 Planning and Preparation
It is apparent that MSF operations are greatly dependent on the RCAF. For
dropping heavy weapons an operational aircraft is required. Anything less than a
Dakota is unrealistic. Close support aircraft, such as light bombers or fighter
bombers, would add considerably to the value of the exercise. A helicopter would
increase the reconnaissance ability of the ground troops and would add efficiency and
realism to the current medical concept. Finally a photographic reconnaissance
aircraft, plus a processing unit with an interpretation team, would be a decided asset.
5 Organization
The normal company, platoon and section organizations were found to be
satisfactory under conditions encountered on these exercises with the exception of:
(a) Company HQ should include one intelligence section representative.
(b) Delete two privates - cooks.
6 Transport Support
Norsemen type aircraft is highly suitable for up to company scale operations for
both aerial reconnaissance and supply, excluding supporting weapons. Only the
helicopter could be more suitable and, if the helicopter could stow casualties
internally in winter, it would be excellent for casualty evacuation as well.
7 Resupply by air permits the full force to concentrate on the enemy. Porters are
not necessary to return to the original DZ to collect rations and ammunition, and
energy of the troops is not expended man-carrying these loads.
130
8 Fire Support
Weapons such as the 3” mortar, which are too heavy for man-packing for any
distance, can be air dropped into their fire positions and may be retrieved after the
battle by helicopter or by man-pack to nearby lakes for recovery by normal air lift.
9 Engineer Support
There are many eskers and raised beaches where hasty airstrips can be used by
Norseman type aircraft without any skilled labour. There are several eskers and raised
beaches where makeshift airstrips for Dakota type aircraft can be used in an
emergency after labour with a minimum of plant.
10 Logistics
During the fighting part of the exercises it was found that platoon groups require
360 lbs resupply each day, and company groups require 1900 lbs.
11 Reconnaissance
To date no suitable photographic reconnaissance aircraft have been used. The sixinch
lens in the Lancaster can not provide a clear photograph with a scale more
detailed than 1 over 6000, which is not adequate to pinpoint defences.
12 Owing to adequate maps not being available for other than small areas of the
Canadian north, gridded vertical photographs may be necessary.
13 Mobility
General reference to vehicles have been made in the past. As the concept of this
exercise was based on an air assault, no operational vehicles were used. Until different
aircraft or vehicles are produced, references to the mobility and influence of vehicles
are not pertinent.
14 There was no example where a waterway impeded infantry movement. In no case
was even a poncho improvised to move a dry load. Few lakes are deep enough to
warrant any special training.
15 Assault Tactics
Summer darkness in the Arctic, while not black as long as in the South, at least
takes away all colours and restricts the visibility of movement a great deal. It is 
131
difficult but could be possible for well disciplined troops to achieve considerable
surprise. However, it must be assumed that the enemy would be alert after an
airborne operation nearby.
16 A well dug in enemy, even without a bonus of extra supporting weapons, is such a
formidable target that with or without air support a maximum amount of supporting
fire is required plus an assault force at least four times the enemy strength. Troops
frequently underestimate the time to reach their destination.
17 Ground Battle
From this series, it appears that a company group, without adequate supporting
weapons, is not sufficiently strong to overcome an enemy platoon well organized for
defence on the barrens. It may be that offensive air support would weigh the scales in
favour of the attacker but a heavy scale of supporting weapons seems essential. This
is particularly true if the enemy surrenders some manpower weight for an increment
of automatic weapons.
18 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
Vehicle tracks and well used foot tracks particularly in wet terrain, were generally
visible from the air. The lower and slower an aircraft is moving the more likely the
pilot/observer is to pick out the tracks. There is no guarantee that a well-disciplined
enemy will leave tracks that our Air Force can find.
19 During the Arctic summer twilight, troops are easily skylined to an observer who
keeps to low ground. Movement can be seen at distances well beyond MMG range.
20 Communications
Until a man-pack long range set is available the only reliable means of
communication from the exercise area to the advance base is the use of orbiting
aircraft. This was done by use of a No 88 set on the ground and duplicated in the
aircraft which flew over the exercise area on timed missions twice a day.
21 The WS No 88 is not normally handled by RC Sigs personnel and when handled
by the infantry alone quickly becomes unreliable. A reasonable pool of reserves is
required. The WS No 58 is not suitable.
22 Wireless communication within a platoon is necessary. Additional wireless sets
are required for use by patrols.
132
23 Reserve batteries are required for all walkie-talkie type wireless sets using dry type
batteries.
24 Medical
There was no increase of sickness despite the dampness.
25 Troops must be dentally inspected and treated at unit home stations prior to
dispatch to the exercise area.
26 Selection and Training of Personnel
Fear of the north, which has been emphasized in several reports, can be controlled
by skilled indoctrination. However, this indoctrination must stress the three special
problems of the Arctic in summer:
(a) requirement for skilfull navigation.
(b) appreciation of increased fatigue.
(c) seriousness of poor planning.
27 Officers about to come on exercises must read and discuss with the troops the
report on the last similar exercise.
28 It is imperative that troops be prepared for navigation problems. Since adequate
maps of the barrens are not available, a high standard of basic photo reading is
required by all officers and NCOs. An adequate standard of dead reckoning, as
demonstrated during this exercise, can be reached only if troops in their home areas
practice the recommended techniques.
29 The buzzing of mosquitoes and other insects does not cut down a man’s auditory
ability and does not make it difficult to ascertain direction and distance of sound.
Vision is impaired to some extent when mosquito nets are worn. Troops can be
familiarized with this new factor during the environmental training period preceding
the operation or exercise.
30 To ensure that troops do not bunch in movement across open spaces or
immediately prior to crossing an obstacle, training and capable leadership are
required.
133
31 Emphasis should be placed on navigation, overland travel and camp routine
during the indoctrination phase carried out at unit home stations. Special emphasis
should be placed on discipline. Officers and NCOs, before reaching the exercise area,
must know the use of the magnetic compass, maps, and protractors in detail.
Principles and use of dead reckoning, log keeping in detail, and basic photographic
reading must also be known.
32 Full protection against biting insects is completely theoretical, but “Fly-Bye”
repellent provides reasonable protection in most cases. Some adaption is required to
suffer local insect life but at no time during the exercise did it appear to limit the
efficiency of the fighting troops.
33 Administration
The Arctic 5-in-1 ration pack was excellent. It is obvious however, that the pack
must be subdivided into five equal parts, one for each man, so that no items are
carried by one man for others. In addition, it may be that for the short period up to
the success signal a lighter ration may be possible.
34 Two-man pup tents made by using two ponchos can be constructed in fifteen
minutes.
35 The number of personnel required to prepare supplies and equipment for
resupply by air are as follows:
(a) Platoon groups - Cpl plus 2 RCASC privates.
(b) Company groups - 1 Sgt, 1 Cpl, 3 RCASC privates.
36 To ensure supplies are available, two days’ rations should be carried with the
moving force to cater for non-flying days.
37 For a company group proceeding to Fort Churchill for training, an officer is
required with an advance party.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
38 Equipment Generally
For minimum clothing and equipment to be worn or carried see Appendix “A” of
this report. This applies to continental North America for Jun-Jul-Aug-Sep. The 
134
only weights which should be available after the parachute assault, but not necessarily
before the success signal, are the 2½ lbs of holdall, housewife and two pair of socks.
39 There is some preference for the packboard compared to the rucksack.
40 The issue headgear is not suitable for protection against rain or mosquitoes.
41 There is some support for a shelter half to wrap around the packboard.
42 A 10 oz flynet to cover the sleeping bag was found valuable.
43 Binoculars were most important.
44 The trousers worn should have a string at the bottom of each leg which can be
drawn to keep out mosquitoes.
45 The rubber bottom, leather top shoepack is not suitable for tundra operations. It
is too heavy, ships too much water, hardens in the water and causes too many blisters.
It has, in fact, little in its favour on the soft wet barrens. The shoe required is one
which is light and either permits the water to seep out or is made of oil tanned
leather. The Canadian Jungle Boot, while somewhat fragile, is in many
characteristics a more suitable boot.
Appendix “A” to Exercise “Deer Fly” Lessons Learned
RECOMMENDED CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT
SUMMER
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Serial Article Weight Total Weight
lbs ozs lbs ozs
1 Worn on the Man (X50 Mod)
(a) Field Cap Summer 4
(b) Necksquare 2
(c) Shirts Khaki Cotton 3
(d) Shirts Under Cotton 2
(e) Shirts Flannel Khaki 14
(f) Socks GS (2 Prs) 8
(g) Insoles Felt 10
(h) Boots Rubber Bottom
Leather Top 3 6
135
Serial Article Weight Total Weight
lbs ozs lbs ozs
(j) Jackets (X50 Mod) 2 3
(k) Trousers (X50 Mod) 1 9
(l) Gloves Leather Black 4
(m) Knife Clasp 3
(n) Nethead Mosquito 2
(o) Matchbox w/compass 1
(p) One 2 oz Bottle Mosquito
Repellent 3
(q) Skeleton Web (Water
Bottle Full) 4 8 15 2
2 Carried by the man
(a) Rucksack US Patt 5 2
(b) Sleeping Bag (Outer
w/cover) 7
(c) Sweater High Neck 1 3
(d) Holdall 11
(e) Housewife 5
(f) Mugs enamelled 4
(g) Poncho 3 6
(h) Two days’ Rations (Cdn 5-
in-1) 6 23 15
3 Rifleman including 1 and 2
(a) Rifle No 4 w/bayonet 9 4
(b) Bandolier (50 rds of .303)
2 14
(c) 1 Magazine Bren (28 rds of
.303) 2 12 53 15
4 Bren Man including 1 and 2
(a) Bren LMG .303 19 8
(b) 4 Magazines Bren (28 rds
.303) 11 69 9
NOTE: (a) If X51 clothing is worn add 5 ozs to the above.
(b) If Bush Clothing is worn subtract 8 ozs from the above.