GENERAL
1 Exercise “SUN DOG THREE” was a two-sided joint exercise:
(a) Dates: 4 Feb 52 to 14 Feb 52
(b) Area: CHIMO, LABRADOR
(c) Troops Participating:
 (i) Friendly Force - 1 Coy Gp 1 R 22e R
Det 23 Fd Sqn
Det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn
One Air Supply P1, 23 Tpt Coy
Det 27 Fd Amb
Det 28 COD
(ii) Enemy Force - One reinforced P1 1 RCR
One Det 23 Fd Sqn
(iii) The RCAF provided tactical and transport support to the friendly
force.
118
(d) Aim: The aims of the exercise were set out in the Department of
National Defence, Joint Exercise Directive No 1, dated 11 Jul 52.
They were:
(i) To practice an operation to destroy an enemy force which has
captured one of our northern airfields.
(ii) To practice restoring a northern airfield for our own purposes
when it has been retaken from the enemy.
(iii) To exercise Canadian Army/Royal Canadian Air Force staffs in
winter, Arctic, airborne operations.
(iv) To exercise the 1st Battalion, Royal 22e Regiment, and
supporting arms in airborne operations on a company group
scale.
(v) To exercise Royal Canadian Air Force units in offensive and
transport air support.
(vi) To test the “Standard Operating Procedure” and the “Logistics
Support Plan” for the Mobile Striking Force.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
2 Planning and Preparation
 Existing staffs at Eastern Command and Tactical Air Group can successfully
plan and conduct an exercise of this nature. But the task, in addition to many other
duties, necessitated working under pressure for several months, and the normal
functions of both headquarters suffered accordingly. Additional planning staff would
appear to be required at both headquarters, both for the planning of such exercises,
and for other purposes, such as the planning of operations or mobilization.
3 A senior operations staff officer, fully conversant with all phases of the exercise, is
needed as conductor of the observer party.
4 If an exercise is to be held in the north in winter, then the decision must be made
in ample time to permit the movement of heavy equipment during the previous
summer.
119
5 Representatives of the units from supporting arms and services must be consulted
during the very early stages of planning to ensure the consideration of their special
requirements. Operating Air Force units should be similarly consulted at an early
stage to ensure the possibility of last minute airlift requirements.
6 Directives for future winter exercises should be issued as early as possible. It is
considered that Tactical Air Group can conduct a maximum of two major exercises a
year.
7 Commanders of units required to provide resources should participate in initial
planning conferences.
8 The umpire organization should provide for one umpire per platoon and an
umpire to assess aircraft casualties during air to ground attacks.
9 Planning should include functions for the Canadian Rangers and local
inhabitants.
10 The enemy should be provided with an increased scale of automatic weapons and
mortars. In particular, some form of anti-aircraft weapon, such as 20 mm guns,
should be included.
11 The present capabilities of the Mobile Striking Force are such that a considerable
time will be taken, after the first warning of a lodgement, before effective action can
be taken to destroy the enemy. It appears, from this exercise, that a typical time-table
for an operation in eastern Canada will be:
D Day Initial Warning
D plus one First Air Reconnaissance
D plus three First Air Strike
D plus eight Ground Reconnaissance
D plus ten Ground attack, providing enemy can be dealt
with by the reconnaissance party without further
reinforcement.
Reasons for the comparative slowness of this time-table appear to be:
(a) The tactical reconnaissance aircraft cannot be available for a sortie
before D plus One, owing to distance.
(b) Offensive air support slow in becoming organized as crews are from
Reserve units.
120
(c) Ground forces neither equipped nor trained to a high enough
standard.
(d) Communications in eastern Canada are unreliable.
12 Organization
It is not necessary to stage the airborne troops through a rear base, so long as the
“war base” of the unit is close to a suitable airfield.
13 If the Army Main Base is situated at Command Headquarters then a very small
number of personnel can perform the required functions. RCAF representatives can
be limited to an Air Transport Command Liaison Officer, a small air movement staff
and one Flying Control Officer for operations of short duration.
14 The organization at the Advance Base, as suggested in Standard Operating
Procedure, is generally suitable. Reductions can be made by merging the staffs of the
Operations Commander RCAF and the Commander, Mobile Wing, though both
Commanders are personally required. The Army component can be materially
reduced.
15 Where feasible, plans should provide for the airlift of the airborne force directly
from its war station to the Advance Base.
16 Command and Control
The new Standard Operating Procedure should provide for the senior RCAF
officer at the Advance Base taking charge of operations until the designated
Operations Commander arrives.
17 The responsibility for administration of the Advance Base should be borne by the
RCAF if the base is at an RCAF station.
18 Agreement should be reached as to the standard organization for an airborne
company group for Mobile Striking Force operations. A suggested minimum
organization is shown at Appendix “A”.
121
19 Offensive Support
An airstrip is difficult to neutralize by bombing alone. The indication is that
with our present equipment neutralization will be more easily and effectively
accomplished by the destruction of fuel in bulk storage.
20 One Ground Liaison Officer is not sufficient for carrying out the essential
functions of reconnaissance, offensive support and transport support.
21 Transport Support
The limited payload of Dakota aircraft necessitates exact load planning, and may
even force reductions in the size of the assault force. There is a need for tables of
weights and other data relative to equipment, which would facilitate the planning of
the airlift. There is also need for the provision of RCOC personnel as specialists in
packaging and maintenance duties.
22 Tent group toboggans were not tactically loaded at the home station, and were
not clearly marked to facilitate clearing of the DZ. All tent groups should mark their
toboggans “A” and “B”. The contents of each should be the same within each tent
group.
23 The emplaning officers should be drawn from the unit employed. Two such
officers are necessary, one at the Main Base and the other at the Advance Base.
24 The uncertainty of sub-Arctic weather and its ruling unsuitability for airborne
assault make it imperative that forces arrive at the Advance Base in complete readiness
for the assault, to which they may be despatched with the minimum of delay.
Briefings at the Advance Base should be limited to acquainting the troops with their
immediate part in the operation, and Assault Force Commanders should be free of all
other tasks to concentrate on detailed planning of the assault.
25 All company officers in airborne battalions should be trained in the duties of unit
emplaning officers.
26 The method of packaging supplies for airdrop used on this exercise should be
adopted for future operations.
27 When commands indent for parachutes for Mobile Striking Force exercises, the
forecast date for the drop should be specified. Regulations regarding the shelf-life of a
packed parachute should be reviewed.
122
28 Reconnaissance
Mobile Striking Force plans should contain provision for the use of any aircraft
available at an Advance Base to carry out visual reconnaissance, until proper
reconnaissance aircraft can take over this task.
29 Owing to tree cover and rough terrain it appears doubtful if air reconnaissance
will be able to produce all the information required.
30 When reconnaissance aircraft may have to be diverted, the operations plans
should be to divert them to an airfield equipped with photo developing and
reproduction facilities. In such cases, a photo interpreter should accompany the
aircraft.
31 The small ground reconnaissance party is not a reliable means of obtaining full
battle intelligence. The party must be strong enough to protect itself against any
attack the enemy delivers.
32 Assault Tactics
Because of the difficulty of obtaining detailed information it will seldom be
possible to drop an airborne force with plans already made for a set-piece attack.
33 The minimum strength for a Parachute Platoon in a Mobile Striking Force
operation is considered to be thirty. The company group must also have command,
support and administrative elements.
34 Ground Battle
A mechanical carrier is essential where heavy support weapons have to be
transported over long distances. Until some form of carrier is available these weapons
should be delivered by parachute to the vicinity of the fire position after it has been
secured.
35 Emergency rations must be carried by the man when operating in the north.
36 The use of local inhabitants and facilities would help considerably in clearing the
DZ, and in shortening the time absorbed in the approach march. Such facilities,
including dog-teams and guides, should be organized by the reconnaissance party.
123
37 The concept of the deliberate attack, mounted from a firm base and preceded
by normal reconnaissance patrolling, should be accepted as a basis of tactical planning
for Mobile Striking Force operations.
38 Communications
 The present communications between Halifax and Goose Bay are too
unreliable to support a Mobile Striking Force operation.
39 Analysis of the exercise traffic indicated that one good communication circuit is
adequate to support an operation of this type. If this circuit is a shortwave wireless
circuit, it should be backed up by means of a longwave wireless circuit.
40 Meteorology & Topography
 An adequate meteorological staff, suitably trained for Arctic forecasting, must
be provided for any exercise and the size of this staff will be determined by the local
DOT facilities at Main and/or Advance Base.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
41 Modification to Existing Equipment
 The present equipment of the parachutist is so bulky that it makes even
moving, far less boarding an aircraft, an exhausting and a slow matter. A study to
reduce equipment and to facilitate emplanement is regarded as necessary.
42 The signal equipment in the glider used on this exercise was not successful.
However, it is considered that it did not have a fair test period before being placed on
the exercise.
43 New Developments Required
 The Commander of the ground forces in the assault area must have
communications to the Advance Base so that he can report his situation or request
reinforcements, air support and supplies. He must also be able to communicate with
aircraft in the air.
44 A mechanical carrier is essential where heavy support weapons have to be
transported over long distances. Until some form of carrier is available these weapons 
124
should be delivered by parachute to the vicinity of the fire position after it has been
secured.
45 A study should be undertaken to determine the organization and scale of
equipment needed for the Mobile Field Photographic Section, and the Air
Photographic Interpretation Section, for Mobile Striking Force operations.
46 As soon as possible, units of the Mobile Striking Force, both ground and air,
should be equipped to war scale for Arctic operations.
47 A development project should be initiated for a wireless set, which can be
parachuted and set up as a ground station within one hour, capable of working back
to the Advance Base up to a distance of 500 miles.
48 Action should be taken to procure portable wireless sets capable of reliable
communication from ground units to aircraft. These sets must be of a size suitable
for carriage on the man in a parachute crop.
Appendix “A” to “Sun Dog Three” Lessons Learned
RECOMMENDED MINIMUM ORGANIZATION

OF A RIFLE COMPANY FOR NORTHERN OPERATIONS
ORGANIZATION
1 It is recommended that the following organization be adopted for an Infantry
Rifle Company earmarked for operations similar to those carried out during this
exercise:
(a) Company HQ
(i) Command Group - Two tent groups
Company Commander - SMC
CSM - Rifle
2 Signallers - 2 SMCs
6 Riflemen - 1 LMG and 5 Rifles
Note: Riflemen to provide runners and toboggan haulers.
125
(ii) Administration Group - Four tent groups
Company 2IC - SMC
CQMS - Rifle
8 Riflemen - 1 LMG and 7 Rifles
2 Medical Officers - 2 SMCs
8 Medical Orderlies - 8 SMCs
Note: Riflemen to supply personnel for recovery and stacking of stores.
(iii) Support Group - Five tent groups
MMG Section - 2 MMGs

Section Commander - SMC
9 Gun Numbers - 9 Rifles
3-in Mortar Section - Two 3-in Mortars

Section Commander - SMC
4 Pioneers - 4 Rifles
(b) Three Rifle Platoons - Six tent groups each
(i) Platoon HQ
Platoon Commander - SMC
Platoon Sergeant - Rifle
2 Mortar Numbers - 2 in Mortar, SMC
and Rifle
Runner - Rifle
Med Orderly - SMC
(ii) Three Sections, each
Section Commander - SMC
3 LMG Numbers - LMG and 2 Rifles
4 Riflemen - 4 Rifles
126
SUMMARY OF ORGANIZATION
Detail Offrs OR MMG 3˝
Mor
2˝
Mor
SMC LMG Rif Tents
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (j) (k)
Coy HQ Comd G 1 9 3 1 6 2
 Adm Gp 3 17 11 1 8 4
 Sp Gp 25 2 2 3 22 5
Three P1 HQs (each) 1 5 1 3 3 6
Nine Rifle Secs (each) 8 1 1 6
Total Coy Group 7 138 2 2 3 35 11 99 29
LEFT OUT OF BATTLE
3 To be of any use LOB personnel must be available as soon as possible after the
initial airborne assault. It is recommended that approximately 30 OR be landed with
the resupply delivery and be held in the DZ area as a pool of reinforcements.