GENERAL
1 This was an RCE cross-country engineer reconnaissance exercise to obtain
engineering data, and investigate problems and techniques which arise for small
reconnaissance parties operating in these environments during the arctic summer.
80
2 (a) Date: 12 Jul - 24 Aug 1950
(b) Area: FORT CHURCHILL - CAPE CHURCHILL - OWL
RIVER.
(c) Troops Participating:
23 Fd Sqn, RCE
RCE - 1 officer - OIC
3 OR - (1 trained No 29 W/S Operator 1 trained in first
aid.)
HQ Fort Churchill
RCASC - 2 OR - Drivers for 2 Penguins. (One to be a
Driver Mechanic.)
(d) Vehicles: 2 Penguins, as provided by Prairie Command from Fort
Churchill.
(e) Aim: The aims of this exercise were as follows:
(i) To verify and clarify features noted in air photographs by
observations on the ground.
(ii) To investigate and report on sites suitable for development
as ground air landing strips; this information to include in
the form of a work table, an estimate of time, labour and
equipment required in their preparation.
(iii) To study and report personnel and equipment
requirements for future engineer reconnaissance parties
operating under similar circumstances.
(iv) To investigate and report on local resources and materials
available in the area.
81
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Transport Support
Air supply should be considered essential for any reconnaissance.
4 Engineer Support
Suitable local materials for airfield construction exist in this area.
5 Mobility
A more robust vehicle than the Penguin is necessary for this type of terrain if the
heavy repair and maintenance tasks that proved necessary are to be eliminated. An
amphibious vehicle would have numerous advantages.
6 Topography
The terrain is almost entirely low lying and flat in this area. This and the
abundance of glacial debris, makes surface drainage very poor. The close proximity of
the permafrost level raises the water table and obstructs sub-surface drainage. The
few well drained, and hence dry areas, are confined to the gravel deposits and the
infrequent and restricted areas that protrude above the mean level.
7 The entire area abounds in shallow lakes of various sizes. With few exceptions
they are bounded by parapet-like walls of moss-covered earth varying in height from
4 feet around the large ones to 1 foot around the smaller. There are also numerous
small streams encountered in this area.
8 The greater part of the area is covered with either a grey moss or grass turf. Trees
are spruce and [tamarack], of diameters up to 12 inches and a density of about 1 in
30 square feet. There is some deciduous growth along the banks of the streams and
small rivers and the shores of the larger lakes.
9 A large number of gravel ridges exist along the coastline, varying in shape and size
from knolls of 100 ft diameter to ridges from 2 - 3 miles long.
10 Selection and Training of Personnel
Instruction in navigation and dead reckoning should be a pre-requisite for the
members of such reconnaissance parties.
82
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
11 Modification to Existing Equipment
A more robust vehicle than the Penguin is necessary for this type of terrain if the
heavy repair and maintenance tasks that proved necessary are to be eliminated.
12 The tent pole for the Arctic 5-man tent should be made stronger.
13 All air mattresses (Pads Insulating) developed slow leaks which were impossible to
repair.