GENERAL
1 This was a non-tactical exercise. An initial training period for all personnel was
held at Camp Shilo, Man. Following this, six weeks were spent in advanced training
at Churchill, Man. During this latter period, organization and training were tested
by short preliminary exercises on the barrens.
2 (a) Date: Feb 46 - May 46
(b) Area: CHURCHILL to EDMONTON, via CAMBRIDGE
BAY, COPPERMINE and FORT NORMAN, a total of
3,130 miles.
(c) Troops Participating:
There was a total of 24 officers and 239 OR on this exercise, as
follows:
Moving Force 33
Baker Lake Force 9
Base Force 188
Loran Increment
to Base Force 33
(d) A number of military and civilian scientists and observers also
accompanied the force.
(e) Supplies for the force were delivered by RCAF.
(f) Transportation consisted of 12 snowmobiles and 3 weasels.
32
(g) Aim: The aim of this exercise was to study movement and
maintenance in differing cold weather conditions and in particular:
(i) Army Air Force co-operation.
(ii) Mobility of oversnow vehicles under a wide range of winter
conditions, beginning on the barren grounds and
terminating in the spring in the northwestern bush country.
(iii) Methods of air supply, including the possibility of
establishing temporary landing strips on the barren
grounds.
(iv) Certain technical research projects related to Arctic warfare.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Organization
There appears to be a requirement for a light aircraft for use before proper lines of
communication are established.
4 Mobility
The present vehicle has the mobility required for winter operations in this
country but is not completely satisfactory. A series of vehicles ranging from light
reconnaissance to heavy load carriers is required before operations in all seasons will
be possible. This series should have the oversnow capabilities of the present vehicle
but should be floatable.
5 Vehicle maintenance points should be located at air bases at 500-mile intervals
with intermediate caches and maintenance shelters at 100-mile intervals. The
vehicles should carry enough fuel to travel unassisted between caches and should be
reliable enough to travel between bases without air support. Air support should be
reversed for an emergency.
6 Navigation
It has previously been stated that navigation across unmapped stretches of the
barrens was equivalent to navigation of a ship at sea. The experience gained on this 
33
exercise suggests that this statement be modified since the general rule appears to be
that a straight course cannot be kept by oversnow vehicles for any great distance
owing to obstacles encountered.
7 Small military bodies operating in unmapped territory, or in mapped territory of
poor relief in winter, should be commanded by officers who can handle and calculate
position from a Bubble Sextant of Type 9 or 9a.
8 Training and experience should be given to all such officers in normal map
reading and in direction finding by sun and stars. Dry card compass should be issued
down to the smallest detachment that may have to operate on its own more than one
mile from any other body of troops. LF LORAN, in its present stage of
development, is not considered a valuable method of position finding owing to the
complications of equipment and operation involved for ground troops. It is,
however, considered extremely useful for any aircraft operating in the north and
isolated ground detachments could ask for LORAN position to be given them by
aircraft overhead.
9 Communications
All oversnow vehicles should have two-way radios linked with base installations.
Radios should be suitable as homing beacons for aircraft and should have Direction
Finding loops for navigation.
10 The WS Cdn No 52 used with the radio-compass of the aircraft worked very
satisfactorily as a homing device.
11 Medical
In training and indoctrination of the main factors from a medical point of view
are prevention of snow blindness, frost bite and trench foot.
12 The cab of the present snowmobile was not adaptable for medical purposes, and it
was impossible to stow equipment in a manner which allowed it to be immediately
accessible.
13 Meteorology and Topography
All meteorological instruments to be used in the Arctic should be thoroughly
winterized.
34
14 The following are recommendations relating to meteorological programme with
moving force:
(a) Improve reporting programme by regular halts of 10 to 15
minutes, to permit the weather observer to make accurate
observations and deliver the coded message to signals.
(b) Weather vehicle should be near the signals vehicle to facilitate
handling of both reports and forecasts. It should have intercommunication
with lead vehicle and signals vehicle to provide
information such as used in the “Sitrep”, altimeter settings, surface
wind speeds, etc, required for air supply drop and landings.
(c) Forecasts should be delivered to the Meteorological Officer for his
interpretation. He should then advise the Force Commander of
the anticipated weather.
(d) A forecast issued late at night and at mid-day would be more
useful in preparing and breaking camp.
(e) Instruments which can be read from inside the vehicle are
recommended for this type of travel. An astrodome fitted on the
top of the vehicle would improve observations.
15 Due to the nature of terrain in the winter and the numerous lakes, the force was
able to pick out a landing strip for aircraft rapidly, with little or no preparation.
Generally speaking, the higher the latitude the less snow cover was experienced and,
therefore, less preparation was necessary.
16 Selection and Training of Personnel
A crew of an oversnow vehicle should consist of a minimum of three, one of
whom should be a mechanic, one a wireless operator and all capable of driving.
17 It should be stressed that normal training must be completed prior to the
specialized training for this type of climate.
18 Signal personnel, preferably volunteers, must be carefully selected for ability and
physical fitness. Operators must be top rate code men, able to send and receive with
gloves on and copy code in vehicles on the move. Instrument mechanics and
electricians must be familiar with the wireless sets being used. Signal personnel 
35
should be trained in their duties prior to an exercise to enable them to participate in
the complete general training given to other members of the expedition.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
19 Modification to Existing Equipment
Although it is advisable that troops operating in the barren grounds during winter
should be trained in the cutting of snow blocks and construction of shelters and
igloos, and efficient tent will give ample protection. The size of this tent depends on
the number of men required to be housed, but the tent used should have the
following modifications:
(a) Cotton liner.
(b) Wider snowflap.
(c) Pegs at door opening.
20 For more extended tactical manoeuvres or operations in the barren lands further
shelters for repairs, maintenance and drying of equipment will be essential.
21 A satisfactory parka for winter motorized operations in the barrens would require:
(a) Outer material light and flexible, equivalent to “Byrd” cloth.
(b) A lighter and more flexible liner than that in the RCAF parka.
(c) Full-length front opening and pockets with windproof closure
operative with mittens.
(d) Modified drawstring assembly to permit easy adjustment when
wearing mittens.
(e) A closure at bottom of hood that gives greater protection from
wind than the present buttons.
22 The string vest is a very useful piece of clothing worn by nearly all the men on the
expedition, but could be improved by fitting to cover a greater area of the body.
After use they shrank so as to expose a large area of chest.
36
23 The neck square is much too short, but would be adequate if made longer.
24 The following modifications are required for the parka hood:
(a) Fur having longer, stiffer hair similar to wolverine, so that most of
the frost can be scraped or beaten off.
(b) A means of securing the hood snugly around the face and
manipulating it easily with heavy mittens. Outer edge reinforced
as in Craft hood.
(c) A means of holding the front of the hood in place with the least
possible use of a drawstring.
25 The following modifications are required for handguns:
(a) An extremely light outer mitten to be worn over a work mitten
with a liner, and capable of being slid on and off easily.
(b) A long, wide stiff gauntlet which can be slipped over the sleave
and secured with a very short wristlet fitting up inside the sleeve.
(c) A light gasoline proof mitt that will remain pliable in temperatures
of -40° F to -50° F.
26 The mukluk should be modified by lightening of the sole, use of a rubber that
does not stiffen with cold, strengthening the canvas upper, and permitting a better fit
over the instep. An all-rubber snowpack should be developed.
27 Considerable shifting of the sleeping-bag material occurred and might be lessened
by inserting partitions in the tubes.
28 The knife and fork issue was seldom used. Most of the cutting was done with
spoons and pocket or sheath knives.
29 The issue snow knife was used a great deal, but would be improved by making a
longer handle similar to the Eskimo knife.
30 The snow now could be improved by making a pointed end, providing easier
penetration into the hard-packed snow and a longer handle opening for use with
mittens.
37
31 The following modifications are necessary in order that the Penguin snowmobiles
can be used on exercises in northern Canada:
(a) The cooling system must be redesigned to permit operation with a
safe margin at ambients of 80ºF.
(b) A suitable air cleaner should be provided for for spring and
summer operations.
(c) The overall gear ratio should be altered to reduce the minimum
speed in top gear by about 25%. This would permit continuous
operation in higher gears and should reduce hunting.
(d) Mechanical advantage of steering linkage should be reduced and
all steering brake band adjusting yokes should be replaced by the
modified part.
(e) The pitching characteristic of the vehicle should be reduced if
practical.
(f) The cab should be completely redesigned with due attention to
physiological consideration of personal comfort, riding position,
location of instruments and controls and ingress and egress.
Appearance is un-important. Rear vision, heating, windshield
cleaning, and protection from toxic fumes are essential.
(g) The generator should be fitted with charging voltage at idling
speed.
32 The following conclusions may be drawn from the performance of sleds on this
exercise:
(a) Net weight payload and drawbar ratio was poor.
(b) Runners are too short for drifts on sea ice and barren lands,
causing excessive pitching.
(c) Runners are too weak for hard drifts and rocky country.
(d) Suspension system and method of attachment of runners are
excellent from the point of view of shock resistance and
replacement.
38
33 Night driving brought out the need for a reliable lighting system. Whether
because of inferior quality bulbs, high voltage, vibration of the vehicle, or the extreme
cold cannot be said, but the replacement rate of spotlight bulbs of 60 watt rating
became troublesome.
34 The following recommendations are made with regard to eye glasses:
(a) Neutral density glass should be used.
(b) Should be more strongly constructed as the present issue crack and
break easily in extreme cold.
35 The present oversnow vehicle has the mobility required for winter operations in
this country but is not completely satisfactory. A series of vehicles ranging from light
reconnaissance to heavy load carriers is required before operations in all seasons will
be possible. This series should have the oversnow capabilities of the present vehicle
but should be floatable.
36 New Developments Required
The issue flash light was inconvenient to use because of the long battery cord.
Low-temperature batteries should be developed.