GENERAL
1 During this exercise on RCASC trials some supplied troops and tested equipment
used.
2 (a) Date: Dec 1947 - Nov 1948
(b) Area: CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:
23 Transport Coy - 2 officers
9 OR
(d) Vehicles: 56 Caterpillar tractors
Athey tracked trailers (6 ton)
Sleighs, commercial (10 ton)
43
Wanngans
Bombardiers
Penguin MI II
(e) Aim: The aim of the trial was to:
(i) Determine the practicability of using tractor trains in the
establishment of a line of communication in winter
operations in the north.
(ii) Train RCASC personnel in the maintenance and operation
of tractor train transport under Arctic winter conditions.
(iii) Provide test data and trained personnel with
knowledge of the operation of ground transport under
Arctic conditions adequate for instruction of additional
personnel to conduct similar operations.
(iv) Test equipment used during the trials.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Early planning is essential for any future northern exercises.
4 It is most important that an advance party from trials teams be sent to Fort
Churchill before the winter sets in to ensure all equipment, tools and spare parts as to
availability and condition.
5 If future operations are to be undertaken a separate establishment should be
formed and personnel selected for continuous employment on trials teams, including
clerks, welders, blacksmiths, carpenters and motor mechanics.
6 Mobility
It is considered practical to employ tractor trains in the establishment of an L of C
in winter operations in the northland, as they can operate under the most severe
winter arctic conditions.
44
7 Oversnow vehicles must be provided for the purpose of transporting personnel
and equipment, also to contact tractor trains on the trail in case of mechanical failure,
illness, change of orders, etc.
8 Communications
Long range wireless sets must be provided.
9 Any oversnow vehicles must be equipped with wireless.
10 Complete wireless communications, capable of covering the area to be travelled,
should be established for all operations.
11 Selection and Training of Personnel
The operation of tractor trains requires highly trained technical personnel as all
units must be self-sustaining and capable of performing all necessary repairs to
equipment when operating at distances from base.
12 It is recommended that diesel tractors D6’s and D7’s be embodied in the training
vehicle establishment of the RCASC School, Camp Borden, and that a course of
instruction on the maintenance and operation of this equipment be made available to
RCASC personnel.
13 All personnel operating tractor trains should be given an Arctic indoctrination
course to include first aid, navigation, map reading and snow reading.
14 Administration
Repair facilities and stocks of spare parts for all equipment must be adequate and
readily available at base otherwise the maintenance of the troops is seriously affected.
15 Clothing and equipment for use in the Arctic must be drawn under the
supervision of an officer who is responsible for ensuring that the items issued are in
good order and fit properly. This is most important.
16 It is recommended that a building or substantial shelter be allotted or supplied for
maintenance and repair. This shelter should be large enough to accommodate at least
three tractors.
17 Fresh rations were found to be satisfactory for tractor train operations under
winter conditions.
45
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
18 Equipment Satisfactory
The D6 Caterpillar tractors were most satisfactory as prime movers, but should be
supplemented with D7 for large tonnage hauling.
19 Modifications to Existing Equipment
Disadvantages should be very easily overcome by modification in construction of
the Bombardier. It is therefore recommended that further tests of a modified version
be carried out.
20 The Penguin MK II proved reasonably satisfactory, but was found to be very slow
and extremely tiring on long trips due to excessive pitching.
21 The Wannegan is a reasonably satisfactory vehicle handling well on the road and
on trails but needing modification of the body and of the sleighs.
22 The Athey trailer is considered unsatisfactory for tractor train operations.