GENERAL
1 This exercise was conducted as a military reconnaissance of the Alaska Highway.
2 (a) Date: 26 Aug 46 - 8 Sep 46
(b) Area: ALASKA HIGHWAY
39
(c) Troops Participating:
 4 officers from HQ, Western Command
 2 Active and 6 Reserve officers from Military District No
11
 3 Active and 21 Reserve officers from Military District
No 13
 44 OR , Active and Reserve from Military District No
13
(d) Six representatives of the press and radio also accompanied the force.
(e) Transportation consisted of 33 vehicles.
(f) Aim: The aim of the exercise was to:
(i) Familiarize certain representative officers of the Reserve and
Active Force with the Alaska Highway and its adjacent
terrain.
(ii) Select areas which could possibly be utilized for training at
some future date.
(iii) Gather data giving specific information relative to the north
country.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Organization
The type of unit or group best suited for the Highway and the defence of its
installations must be completely mobile, the Armoured half-track vehicle should form
the basis of lifting infantry, and the unit should be well supplied with LMCs and
include a certain number of Heavy Machine Guns such as the Browning .5. It was
agreed that the Motor Battalion and its sub-units were the best suited organization
now existing in the Canadian Army.
4 Armoured Cars should be an intrinsic part of the team or at least available. It is
considered that a troop would be sufficient with each combat group.
5 Field artillery would be invaluable.
40
6 Local inhabitants who know the country, irrespective of their age, should be
enrolled as guides.
7 Tank Support
Tanks would be very valuable in giving fire support, and in particular, for air field
defence. Transporter should be used unless a lighter tank such as the M-24 could be
employed.
8 Engineer Support
Tasks envisaged for Engineers are as follows:
(a) RCE detachments to be included if the task required demolition, bridge
repair or river crossing.
(b) That Pioneer elements of the Infantry, if properly trained, would be
capable of functioning efficiently in many instances.
(c) That Engineer units should be available at properly spaced intervals to
work as and when required, and to avoid breaking these units up into
penny-packets.
9 Patrols
Aside from normal combat training, all ranks should be highly skilled in patrols
off the road, and often times over mountain ranges.
10 Light aircraft should be employed to put patrols on the ground quickly.
11 The arms should be as light as possible. It was the unanimous belief that the .30
US carbine which is light, and would allow the maximum of ammunition to be
carried, would be the best all-round weapon.
12 Patrol leaders must know the characteristics of a suitable landing place.
13 Defence
Each major installation should have a plan of defence and one of attack in the
event that it should be temporarily occupied.
41
14 Generated smoke on the air landing strips would prevent the possibility of
landings if it could be emitted in time, by reason of the fact that these fields are shut
in by woods, and the pilots could not see, and this is of course, true in the North
country.
15 There should be some form of movable barriers which could be placed on the
landing strips to wreck aircraft coming down. The old type of Grizzly tanks, which
were not to be a permanent part of the Canadian Army, would serve this purpose,
and three or four could be used as a permanent fixture on the principal airfields, and
manned by RCAF personnel if need be.
16 Selection and Training of Personnel
Training on how to exist in the country, particularly in the winter time, was a
fundamental necessity.
17 Training in ambush, and working in small fighting patrols through undergrowth
and in mountainous regions so as to work right as a team in a coordinated operation
would be very valuable.
18 Training in vehicle maintenance should descend to all levels and not entirely to
drivers and mechanics.
19 Training should include woodcraft and a simple method of signaling to aircraft.
20 The Highway had a great many “off-road” training areas which could be utilized
by both the Active and Reserve Force.
21 Administration
Dealing more specifically with the type of Motor Transport required, emphasis
was placed on the Armoured half-truck, particularly during the moderate weather.
During the winter months it was fully recognized that enclosed vehicles were a vital
necessity. Due to lack of specific information relative to the snowmobile and its
availability, opinion was that the half-tracks should be enclosed and conditioned for
winter operations until something better was forthcoming.
22 Hutted accommodation varying from 100 to 1000, is provided at frequent
intervals by abandoned construction camps. These have been constructed in military
style is that they consist of large barrack rooms, office buildings, mess halls, and
frequently recreation rooms. With few exceptions, the camps have been stripped of 
42
all stoves, electrical fixtures, and furniture. Certain camps located near populated
localities have been damaged by removal of windows and flooring, but generally they
afford suitable temporary shelter for short duration halts.