GENERAL
1 This was a joint Army/RCAF summer exercise, to practice Mobile Striking Force
operations in the north. The following assumptions were made:
(a) CALGARY, the Advance Base, represented FORT NELSON.
(b) BUFFALO PARK (WAINWRIGHT), represented an isolated area 50
miles South East of NORMAN WELLS.
(c) The target area in BUFFALO PARK was a weather station and an airstrip
represented by six “mock” 5-man tents and a ploughed strip 2000 feet
long and 150 feet wide. A gasoline cache of thirty-four 45 gallon drums
was located near the airstrip.
2 (a) Area: CALGARY - WAINWRIGHT Area.
(b) Dates: 1 - 14 Jun 52
(c) Troops Participating:
Friendly Force
Coy 2 PPCLI
Det AF Bde Sigs Sqn, RC Sigs
Det 1 AB Med Sec, RCAMC
Det 1 AB P1, RCASC
Enemy Force
P1, 2 PPCLI
(d) RCAF: RCAF participation consisted of:
(a) One light bomber squadron composed of 12 Mitchell aircraft.
(b) One fighter squadron composed of 10 Mustang aircraft.
137
(e) Observers: Observers from Army Headquarters, Tactical Air Group
Headquarters, 18 Wing Headquarters (Aux), Eastern
Command and Quebec Command, attended this course.
(f) Aim: The aims of the exercise were to:
(a) Exercise Eastern Command and Tactical Air Group staffs in joint
planning.
(b) Test the Standard Operating Procedure for Mobile Striking Force
operations within the limits imposed by the exercise.
(c) Exercise 2 PPCLI in airborne operations on company group scale.
(d) Exercise RCAF forces in tactical and transport air support.
(e) Exercise an Air Contact Team.
(f) Test the existing wireless equipment as to suitability for air
dropping and providing adequate communication between the
Assault Area and the Advance Base.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
Planning and Preparation
3 Officers required to fill MSF appointments at the Advance Base should be
previously selected and briefed in the MSF duties. This can be achieved by including
these MSF responsibilities in the normal terms of reference of selected staff and unit
appointments of Headquarters and units having an MSF role.
4 Packaging material for para dropping equipment and stores, both in the initial
drop and resupply, must be available at war stations of MSF units. In order to save
time, all equipment including grease boards, and pre-packed medical and wireless
equipment, must be maintained in mobilization stores of units concerned.
5 To save time, and for use as a guide, draft warning orders and skeleton operation
orders should be included in the MSF Standard Operating Procedure.
138
6 To obviate the difficulty experienced in maps and air photographs being of
different grids, a joint decision is required early in the operation in order to achieve
standardization and agreement on the maps to be used.
7 The Standard Operating Procedure for the Main Base must detail the functions it
will perform prior to the Advance Base being set up and subsequent to the Advance
Base becoming operational.
8 Very rigid security arrangements must be made for the Main and Advance Bases.
All entrances must be guarded. Aircraft must be kept under guard at all times.
Guards can be obtained from LOB personnel.
9 Proper weather charts, route charts and detailed weather reports are necessary
adjuncts to the briefing room. It is essential that the meteorologist be consulted
ahead of time regarding weather forecasts, and action planned accordingly.
10 A courier service must be established between the Main and Advance Bases as
quickly as possible. All despatches, maps, photos, traces, etc, should be collected in
the operations room at each base and when aircraft are cleared from one base to
another, the bag should be handed to the pilot for onward transmission. It may be
necessary under exceptional circumstances to detail a special aircraft or an LO to
travel from one base to the other.
11 To avoid delays caused by late emplaning, a thorough study should be made of
the time interval between the dressing of troops and the emplaning. This will vary
depending on the amount of equipment carried and the number of troops involved.
It may take anywhere up to three hours.
Command and Control
12 There is an unavoidable delay between the time when a lodgement is suspected
and the time when reasonable confirmation becomes available that such a lodgement
exists. This period of delay must be used as a warning period and all necessary action
taken to alert the forces which will be employed in the operation once confirmation
has been received. It may be possible during this period to move certain elements to
the Advance Base including the original Assault Company.
13 It is considered, that for this type of operation, an Air Controller can direct all
strikes himself.
14 The responsibilities of the GLO can be carried out by the Company Commander
if he has been trained in these duties.
139
15 At the Advance Base the umpires should be provided with a separate office.
16 A neutral camp (ghost area) is an essential part of such an exercise to house the
directing staff, neutral signals, medical personnel, umpires, RCAF safety personnel,
PRO, press and observers. It requires must planning.1
 Transport, food and bedding
are required at odd hours. A senior administrative officer should be in charge of
setting up and running such a camp. A notice board is required.
17 To ensure safety precautions on this type of operation, an officer trained in
airborne operations is necessary on the DZ prior to the air drop taking place. He
should be authorized to cancel the jump if conditions appear unnecessarily hazardous
or if the wind is above 18 mph. For this purpose he should be equipped with an
anemometer. Red smoke and red Verey Flares must always be available on the DZ to
indicate to transport aircraft that the jump is called off.
18 The staff at the Joint Operations Room should be duplicated if the operations are
likely to be extended, bearing in mind that there may be other commitments with
which they will have to deal.
19 For details and recommendations for layout of an “Ops” room, see Para 40, 41
and Appendix “B” of the main report.
20 Due to the very real possibility that several operations will be conducted
simultaneously, the principal Intelligence Officer, GSO II (Int) should be located at
the Main Base. The intelligence establishment should be reviewed to ensure that
sufficient Intelligence personnel are available within the Command. Separate
Intelligence staffs may be required for each operation.
21 The complete Command Headquarters should be alerted. Exercise messages
should be handled through normal channels and only that information having a
bearing on the planning or conduct of the operation at hand should be passed to the
Joint Ops Group. Otherwise the operational staff in the Joint Ops Room will be
cluttered up with irrelevant detail.
22 A daily conference is necessary. The conference should be presided over by one or
other of the Joint Commanders. The agenda must be prepared jointly to ensure that
no points are omitted. All decisions must be confirmed in writing immediately after
the conference.
 1 This sentence is reproduced as it appears in the original.
140
23 A guide for duties of staff officers employed at the Advance Base is given in Part
IV of the report on this exercise. Paras 48 and 49 refer.
24 When JAPIS is organized it must include two trained Intelligence specialists. In
prolonged operations four would be necessary.
25 A unit emplaning officer must be detailed by the unit to be emplaned. He should
report to the Advance Base prior to his unit’s arrival.
26 To avoid confusion in case of casualties, key personnel must be covered by
nominating reliefs who can take over automatically. For this and other duties around
the Advance Base, LOB personnel from the assault company should be moved to the
Advance Base with their company.
Offensive Support
27 More practice must be afforded in the dropping of HE bombs.
28 Pattern bombing techniques must be stressed.
Transport Support
29 The section of 1 AB P1, RCASC, was fully employed on packaging equipment
for the resupply. No members of the platoon jumped although they accompanied
the assault company in order to push out door loads. It is considered that a checker
and the spare member of the air crew are capable of pushing out door loads. RCASC
personnel are not necessary and do not warrant the space allotted to them in the
aircraft in the initial assault drop. A sub-section should be available to jump into the
assault base to organize the DZ and handle the resupply. Detailed personnel should
be on hand at the Advance Base to load the resupply immediately the air transport
becomes available. This will require off-hour feeding arrangements.
30 Load manifests for the resupply should be compiled by the ATLO.
31 To enable aircraft to be tactically loaded more transport type aircraft should be
made available.
32 The use of a Check Team comprised of the Unit Emplaning Officer, a senior
transport Captain (RCAF), and a member of the loading party should become
standard practice. This team should check the pararack loading, bells, lights and
electrical circuits approximately one hour prior to take off. Delays caused by faulty
loading, which are in practice found to be quite frequent, will thus be overcome.
141
Fire Support
33 For exercise purposes there must be two separate target areas, one for air
bombardment and one for ground assault. Safety factors preclude the merging of the
two target areas.
34 For this exercise, two 60 mm Mortars were considered to be adequate for organic
support. Of the two dropped, one was damaged. Planning for future exercises
should provide for spares to replace damaged equipment.
Communications
35 Until a long range air droppable set is available, rear link communications will
have to rely on the glider-borne communication equipment. The operators for this
and other types of communication equipment must be highly trained and capable of
functioning efficiently during periods of interference due to atmospherics. Teams
which have worked together should be made available from the Active Force Brigade
Group Signal Squadron and should be continually exercised in their role.
36 All signals communications for airborne assaults should be duplicated. In
addition 100% spare wireless sets, batteries and spare parts must be held at the
Advance Base. A battery charger is essential to keep batteries fully charged. The
disadvantage of high aerial masts must be accepted at present if long ranges are to be
worked.
37 Radio mechanics must be of a high calibre, capable of repairing all types of sets
used in the exercise and must be supplied with tools and a minimum of spare parts to
ensure satisfactory maintenance.
38 Line communication was used between the assault base and the patrol base.
Assault cable was used, carried by two men and played out from a reel No 3. Due to
the difficulty of obtaining a suitable ground, a twisted pair should be used. To
simplify laying, cable should be packed in dispenser coils.
39 The frequency allotted to neutral and command signal nets must be checked prior
to the operation to ensure no mutual interference is caused. Neutral communications
must not be overheard on the operational frequencies.
40 The following information should be passed from the Advance Base to the Main
Base on a regular schedule:
(a) Intrep.
142
(b) Sitrep.
(c) Admrep.
(d) Forecast of Ops.
41 DRs and Orderlies should be provided at the Advance Base.
42 Additional telephones could have been used to advantage on the airfield, at the
arming area, fighter dispersal area, light bomber dispersal area, and transport dispersal
area.
43 Only codes as laid down in the operation order should be used. A suitable MSF
operation code should be produced.
Medical
44 The Regimental Aid Post consisting of one MO and four Medical Assistants from
the Airborne Medical Section, parachuted with the initial assault company. In
addition, one stretcher bearer per platoon was provided by the company. Two tents
and necessary medical equipment accompanied the drop. This establishment was
considered adequate.
45 The surgical team should jump as soon after the initial para assault as possible, ie,
with the resupply. The bulk of the equipment could remain packed at the Advance
Base ready to be called forward. In view of the uncertainty of weather and
communications, it is considered that a better alternative would be to have this
equipment duplicated, one set to drop into the Assault Base and a resupply held at
the Advance Base to drop onto the battle field if required.
46 The MO and Regimental Aid Post should move with the assault force when an
attack is planned.
Meteorology and Topography
47 There is a requirement at the Assault Base for a meteorologist capable of giving a
rough met report. One member of the ACT should have a knowledge of
meteorology, probably the Air Controller.
143
Selection and Training of Personnel
48 Troops designated for MSF operations must be practiced in dressing and
emplaning quickly. If necessary, additional personnel should be made available to
assist in getting the para troops dressed prior to embarkation.
49 Some equipment was lost or dropped free in error during the para drop. This was
partly due to equipment being incorrectly put on. More practice is required in
lowering equipment during the descent. One stacker is required per aircraft in order
to inspect equipment. This cannot be done by the stick leader as he is too heavily
loaded. The checker can also be used in dispatching door loads. The checker should
be a para unit NCO well acquainted with members of the stick.
50 A number of the wireless sets jumped in during the initial assault failed to
function on landing. More training is required in packaging communication
equipment for air dropping.
Administration
51 Arrangements must be made at the Advance Base or final emplaning base to give
the assault force a substantial meal prior to emplaning for the assault area.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
Equipment Satisfactory
52 Ponchos should be issued as standard equipment for MSF personnel.
New Developments Required
53 A droppable cross-country prime mover is required to transport heavier ground
fire support weapons and their ammunition.
54 Due to the continuous rain the outer cardboard container of the Arctic Ration
Pack (5-in-1) became damp and soggy. Outer containers should be waterproofed.
55 There is a requirement for a wireless set capable of operating a distance of 500
miles under all atmospheric conditions. It must be air droppable. Until such a set is
available the only alternative appears to be to use a glider for airtransporting wireless
equipment of sufficient power to work 500 miles under all conditions.
144
56 A portable anemometer should be standard equipment with each MSF battalion.
57 A wireless set suitable for use by the ACT is not yet available. Such a set should
have the following characteristics:
(a) Be within frequency range of the aircraft set installed in fighter
bombers.
(b) Be man-portable.
(c) Have a minimum range of 10 miles (15 miles or more are desirable
with the increased speed of aircraft).
(d) Be capable of being air dropped.
This development should be given a high priority.