GENERAL
1 This non-tactical exercise was the first extensive manoeuvre ever carried out by
the Canadian Army over the Arctic barrens.
2 (a) Date: Mar - Apr 1945
(b) Area: CHURCHILL, MAN to PADLEI, NWT, and return, a total
of 653 miles.
(c) Troops Participating:
(i) Four officers under command of Maj PD Baird.
(ii) Observers from Department of Munitions and Supply,
Mines and Resources, and US Army.
(iii) Eleven rank and file.
(d) Vehicles:
(i) Two Snowmobiles Armoured Mk I
(ii) Two Tractors, Snow M7.
(iii) Two Tractors M-29 (Weasel).
(iv) Ten Sledges Trailer.
(v) Two Komatik Sleds.
(e) Aim:
(i) To obtain information of a non-tactical nature by which to
extend Canadian Army winter doctrine from sub-Arctic
conditions.
(ii) To provide data upon which to base further development of
oversnow vehicles.
20
(iii) To explore the barren grounds as an area for further winter
exercises.
(iv) To assist civil development and surveys in the barren
grounds.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Mobility
The exercise proved that travel over the Barren Grounds and coastal sea ice in
oversnow vehicles is not difficult. 113 miles were covered in a single day and 653
miles during 10 travelling days. The inland Barren Grounds may be likened to a cold
and windswept desert. Conditions there are as different from those of the cold subArctic
bush country as are conditions in the African desert from those of the jungles.
4 The exercise proved that the inaccessibility of the Arctic is just another myth and,
providing supplies are ensured, operations on the barren grounds which represent one
third of Canada’s area can be as unhindered as operations on the Libyan deserts. It
would therefore seem desirable that for defence purposes Canada should develop
further oversnow vehicle types and train personnel to operate in these regions.
5 Comparison between vehicular and dog team travel[,] while not directly made on
this exercise[,] can be stated here. The unsupported range of dog team travel is not far
short of the 700 miles maximum range of oversnow vehicles. The disadvantages of
dogs are:
(a) The have to eat therefore consume payload while stationary.
(b) They need specially trained drivers.
(c) An average of 40 miles per travelling day is good.
Advantages are:
(a) They can follow tracks, especially their own, in blizzards. Their
drivers can also see tracks more readily than from vehicles.
(b) In emergencies they can travel without food for several days while
vehicles cannot move without petrol.
21
6 Meteorology and Topography
The Barren Grounds are those portions of Canada situated north of the tree limit.
This limit crosses Northern Quebec and stretches northwest from the coast of
Hudson Bay in the neighbourhood of Churchill to near the mouth of the Mackenzie
River. The total area of Canadian Barren Grounds is 1,100,000 square miles,
representing 32 percent of the Dominion’s area, and including all the Arctic Islands.
7 In winter when the snow coverage extends one foot it is often impossible to
distinguish lake from land without digging.
8 The sea in Hudson Bay and elsewhere in Arctic Canada freezes over in winter. A
portion of this is termed “LANDFAST ICE”, ie, that portion which is solid with the
land, the remainder “PACK ICE” which is in motion. The boundary between the
two is termed “THE FLAW” (more usually in Canada, the FLOW).
9 The inner margin of the LANDFAST ICE is aground and depending on its
thickness and the slope of the shore a varying width grounds every low tide. A
hinging effect is thus produced and the ice alongshore is therefore nearly always
rough and tumbled, particularly when tides are high. Along the west coast of Hudson
Bay between Churchill and Eskimo Point the maximum tides have a rise and fall of
15 feet.
10 In coastwise travel by vehicle in winter there are thus three roads for traffic, any of
which may yield the best going:
(a) The lowland, if marshy or a level snow-covered beach.
(b) The ice foot, particularly when it has board ice coverage.
(c) The landfast ice to seaward of the barrier.
11 Although landfast ice moves up and down with each tide, its contours tend to
change slowly, especially in late winter and spring, so a road cut through it will stay
fairly permanently.
12 When sea ice begins to freeze the platy crystals of ice that form are fresh.
Globules of salty brine are enclosed between them and by a leaching process this
brine flushes downwards though some gets forced to the surface. Thus the surface of
young sea ice is nearly always sticky. This means that snow adheres to it very readily
and it is never glare ice, also the friction on sled runners is considerable where they
cut through any snow cover to the salty ice surface.
22
13 In small cracks and leads undisturbed by wind or wave action the surface water is
often fresh due to its lesser density; this is particularly noticeable in spring when
melting of the ice and snow increases this fresh water content. This accounts for the
fact that overflow, if fresh, can cause board ice to be comparatively smooth and glare.
14 Due to the process of its formation thin sea ice is only one third to one half as
strong as its equivalent of fresh ice though after a thickness of perhaps 20 inches is
reached the leaching process has gone sufficiently far for the ice to be well knit, and
for thicknesses greater than 20 inches our present state of knowledge is that for a
given thickness there is no great difference in weight-bearing capacity between the
two forms of ice. Sea ice of only 4 to 5 inch thickness will bear a man and a dog team
with the load on a sledge well dispersed. The rather alarming phenomenon of the ice
surface bending can then be noted.
15 Due to the invariable snow cover and slower process of formation sea ice seldom
attains a thickness greater than 6 feet in undisturbed conditions, though pack ice
through violent motion and rafting can pile up to very great thicknesses. The
maximum thickness of landfast ice is not obtained till early May.
16 On this exercise average snow depth encountered was about 20 inches. This is
rather more than can be expected in a normal year in these regions. All estimates of
average depth are extremely vague since the uniformly windswept condition of the
country results in a very uneven snow cover distribution, with bare ridges and
accumulations in the hollows.
17 On most of the terrain the snow is hard packed bearing the weight of a man (5-7
lbs per square inch) easily. Expectations encountered were:
(a) In rough sea ice where deep soft drifts pile up.
(b) Inland where areas of willow bushes contain soft snow.

(c) Various areas with breakable crust. On 80% of the going encountered,
it may be said that oversnow vehicles with loading of 1 to 1½ lbs per
square inch cut in from nil to 3 inches and only rarely did the vehicles
become bellied.
18 The wind results in irregular snow ridges forming parallel to prevailing winds.
Sastrugi (ridges with over-hanging windward points) are frequent. It therefore makes
a considerable difference to travel whether a vehicle heads with or across the 
23
prevailing drifts. The M29 which is particularly susceptible to pitching could only
reasonably make 8 mph across drifts, and 12 mph or better with the drifts.
19 “Drift” is the expression normally used, in this country, for blowing snow.
“Ground Drift” snakes along the ground, “High Drift” can mean the air filled with
flying snow to a height of 30 or more feet. The velocity of wind required to raise a
given amount of drift varies throughout the year. On this exercise it was found that a
wind of about 12 mph would start ground drift. (In midwinter 4 or 5 mph wind will
do this.) Drift affects visibility considerably. On this exercise a wind of about 18
mph cut visibility to about a mile, 25 mph to 100 yards. Winds of gale force,
particularly in midwinter, can reduce visibility to 10 yards, even when no fresh snow
is falling.
20 In the Barrens there are high steady winds which may average 20 mph for long
periods.
21 Temperature alone is no criterion of the effect of weather on the human body,
which keeps warm and active only by retention of a layer of warm air around it. The
Wind Chill, ie, the combined result of temperature and wind, has been scientifically
worked out to show the dry shade atmospheric cooling effect on the body expressed
in kilogram calories per square meter per hour.
22 In the Barren Grounds winds are high and there is no vegetation to break the
wind. This aspect cannot be stressed too much. In sub-Arctic Canada below the tree
line, temperatures may be low but the wind chill factor is low too. Even though wind
records show appreciable figures there is always the bush present to break the wind
and produce relatively still air, so that frequently wind records from the bush country
should be halved to give the true wind chill value. In the barrens natural shelter is
completely lacking.
23 Selection and Training of Personnel
Special training is required to enable normal troops to operate safely, eg,
construction of snow shelters, route finding, operation of fuel cookers. This is over
and above training necessary to fit troops for sub-Arctic winter operations.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
24 Modification to Existing Equipment
24
The Canadian armoured snowmobile functioned efficiently but to be a desirable
barren ground vehicle it needs the following modifications:
(a) Much improved petrol consumption.
(b) Capacity to seat three or four men with sufficient cargo space on
the vehicle for carrying personal equipment.
(c) A snow-proof cover for the interior of the vehicle allowing allround
vision for the Commander.
(d) Slight reduction in ground pressure.
25 The M29 cargo carrier also functioned fairly efficiently but due to overloading at
the start its transmission did not stand up. It would be a useful barren ground vehicle
with the following modifications:
(a) More powerful (truck type) transmission.
(b) Strengthening of the track idler wheel assembly unit.
(c) Reduction of the ratio in high range of the rear axle.
(d) A more durable track link connecting cable.
This vehicle was found more efficient than the snowmobile in the following ways:
(i) Greater cargo and passenger carrying capacity.
(ii) Better petrol consumption.
(iii) Lower ground pressure.
26 Experiments as to the friction qualities of sled transport were carried out. The
findings are as follows:
(a) Friction is less on long narrow runners as compared with shorter,
broader runners.
(b) While variable at 32°, friction increases in a fairly straight line
ratio with falling of temperature below this figure.
(c) Friction increases with speed.
25
27 In the barren grounds the standard dog sleigh is the Eskimo Komatik, with long
narrow runners and a low platform of cross-bars lashed to them. This is shod with
steel, whalebone, or frozen peat mud, the latter two surfaces being iced, daily, with a
thin film of ice. In spring and fall the steel shoeing is used, but in winter the latter
two types are necessary since steel shoeing tends to have far too great friction at
temperatures below zero. At a temperature of 10 below, one experiment carried out
on Komatiks showed a co-efficient of friction of 0.16 for steel shoeing and 0.08 for
iced whalebone at 5-6 miles per hour. At 40 below zero even the runner drags
heavily, snow at this temperature being similar in consistency to dry sand.
28 Only one of the Komatiks was constructed firmly enough. The main difficulty
encountered was the failure of this type of sled, towed by rope, to track with the
turning vehicle, resulting in its striking rocks and breaking its bow. A rigid tow bar
on this type of sled would be helpful, since it would be difficult for a steerman to
steer it satisfactorily at vehicle speeds as is done when the sled is being pulled by dogs.
A further test of this type of sled is recommended for use behind vehicles with low
draw bar pull (eg, the M29).
29 The snowmobile sleds at least proved sturdy, though several tow bars broke and
tow eyes pulled out. The upturn of the skis became very bent and worn. The sled is
heavy (475 lbs) and the coefficient of friction very great (0.2 on hard snow at 10
below at 6 mph). This must be to some extent due to the cross-section of the runners
and also to the short base, 5 feet, which defies the principle of long, narrow runners
described above. The sled when loaded, and therefore weighing 1000 to 1400 lbs,
was impossible to man-handle with less than 6 men even on flat going.
30 Mitts winter shell did not adequately perform the function for which they are
intended. A fur mitt, not necessarily of caribou, though this is the warmest material,
is necessary in the Barren Grounds in winter. With regard to the trigger finger, it is
felt preferable to have an easily removable mitt, perhaps with safety string attached,
and use the glove inner liner to fire weapons and discard the trigger finger altogether.
31 Mitts winter liner are well knit and of sturdy construction. However, the trigger
finger gets in the way when putting on the mitt together with the mitt winter shell.
Recommended that the trigger finger be omitted. Even if fur mitts are issued this
item should be taken as well, although its use as a liner for a fur mitt gives no
additional warmth.
32 Gloves inner liner wear easily. It is recommended that the glove should be more
skin-tight fit.
26
33 Tins mess rectangular were used uniformly for cooking and eating. When used in
the open the large surface area cools too rapidly. It should also have the old type
rounded corners.
34 Mess tin, US type, has a high heat conducting capacity and is not recommended
as in any way superior to tins mess rectangular.
35 Knives clasp type A is not satisfactory and issue should be discontinued. It is too
large, heavy and unwieldy.
36 Cook set, small detachment, was found useful for melting snow, however the
square corners are not easy to clean.
37 Container portable, one gal., was found to be unsatisfactory insofar as heat
retaining properties are concerned. A more satisfactory type of container is desirable.
38 The housewife is an essential item of issue but should have scissors included.
39 Stones, pocket, sharpening, was found satisfactory, but perhaps unnecessarily
large.
40 Caps, winter melton, proved reasonably warm. A peaked ski cap of similar weight
material would probably be preferable.
41 Caps, Yukon, were found very warm, but too bulky to be worn under parka
hood. They are considered unnecessary when a suitable lined parka hood is available.
42 Caps, ski, US pattern, fit adequately under parka hood, and are recommended for
use if of slightly heavier material.
43 Goggles, sun, Canadian type, were unsatisfactory, and are by no means
recommended.
44 Goggles, sun, US type, tend to fog up when worn in vehicles, due to insufficient
ventilation, and are not recommended.
45 Goggles, sun, browrest type, are judged the best, however slight modification is
required to ear stays.
46 Masks, face, chamois, were not found satisfactory since they absorb moisture from
the breath and freeze rapidly, becoming very cold and uncomfortable. It is not 
27
considered that any kind of face mask is needed if a satisfactory parka hood providing
a warm funnel of air in front of the entire face is provided.
47 Lanterns, hurricane, did not prove too satisfactory, and there is also need for a
strong and snow-proof carrying case for them.
48 Cooker, portable, Coleman, kerosene burning, was found to be satisfactory, but
suffers from the limitations of being slow cooking for more than two people.
49 Cooker, portable #4, worked excellently for cooking for four to six men, and is
recommended, but with a weather-proof carrying case.
50 Torch hand (TL 122B), was found to give an excellent light but was otherwise
unsatisfactory. It needs suitable improvements before it can be recommended for
issue. The switch must have a positive lock on it.
51 Torch hand pocket, was satisfactory, but should have a positive lock.
52 Matches, water resistant, gave good results but did not light easily in the wind.
These would be useful for spring and summer conditions, but in real winter there is
no great need for anything beyond the ordinary match.
53 Drawers, long, khaki, were generally worn and found to be satisfactory, however,
a double-thickness knee patch would be an advantage and for winter operations
underwear should not be khaki for obvious camouflage reasons, if hung up to dry.
54 Vests string, were found to serve the purpose intended, however, modifications
are needed to shoulder straps, there should be a closer fit below the armpits, and the
length of the garment should be to just below the waist.
55 Shirts, cotton khaki, were found cold to put on in sub-zero temperatures. A shirt,
of pattern of the US Army shirt, wool, OD, would be preferable.
56 Suspenders issued were found not elastic enough and it is recommended that a
belt be used instead.
57 Sweaters, high neck, were found satisfactory though the buttons can be hard to do
up with freezing fingers. A roll top is suggested.
58 Bags, container sleeping bag, become very hard in the cold and tear easily. A
canvas bag after the pattern of Kit Bag Mk III is much preferable.
28
59 Covers sleeping bag, water repellant, are not recommended. There is need for a
stronger and waterproof cover.
60 Parka coat, Canadian, is sturdy and pockets are found to be adequate. The hood,
however, is very unsatisfactory. It should be fur-trimmed in order to retain warm air
and from the side the wearer’s nose should be invisible. It should also be lined for
further warmth.
61 Parka, field pile, US Type, is not satisfactory and should have the same
modifications to hood as for Item 60.
62 Overalls, combination, are suitable if hip pockets are added, however, where
windproof outer clothing is the normal rule they are probably superfluous.
63 Bags, Kit, Mk III, should be slightly enlarged in diameter.
64 Rucksack, steel frame, was found to be far from snow-proof, and a light flap
should be installed in the mouth as in the Kit Bag Mk III.
65 Pistol, 9 mm Browning, gave good performance but some method of preventing
the rear sight from moving forward while being fired should be adopted.
66 Covers, breech, rifle, were not satisfactory. An overall cover with drawstring at
the rear is recommended.
67 Boots, mukluk, rubber sole, were found quite adequate if kept dry, but much
discomfort was experienced by melting snow. It is recommended that reduction be
made of the weight of the sole and possibly velanized uppers of slightly heavier
canvas.
68 Mocassins, caribou (hairy), are easily spoiled by wetting, and are not
recommended as practicable.
69 Tents, six-man, were not satisfactory, and the following recommendations are
made:
(a) A stronger, non-collapsible pole.
(b) A flap at least 18” wide and continuous at the corners around the
bottom for weighting and snow-proofing.
(c) Attachments for 3 guy ropes from the top of the pole for gale
conditions.
29
(d) Guy ropes provided with sliders so they can be tightened without
removing pegs.
(e) Double metal pegs extended to the point.
(f) Less inflammable liner.
70 Shovel, snow, short handle, is not recommended. A long handled, large and flatbladed
shovel is required with mechanical transport.
71 New Developments Required
Future development should concentrate on at least two types of vehicle, a light
reconnaissance vehicle capable of carrying 3 or 4 personnel and equipment and a
heavier type which by itself could fulfill the functions of a 15 cwt and with trailers
fulfill the functions of a 60 owt. It is concluded that with the major improvements
suggested oversnow vehicles could have a maximum range for unsupported operation
of 700 miles which must be compared with the range of slower moving tractors of
two to two-and-a-half times this figure.
72 Any tracked trailer design should have a payload to weight empty of at least two
to one, eg, weight unloaded 900 lbs, payload 1800 lbs.
73 Equipment Satisfactory
Mitts, caribou skin, were found to keep the hands warm and were good for
driving and mechanical work in sub-zero weather. They are simply to take off and
put on quickly.
74 Mugs enamel, 3/4 pint, were found satisfactory, and are recommended for issue.
75 Knives, clasp, new design, type B, were completely satisfactory.
76 Bags, food, film were not used for their design purpose, however, were found
useful for keeping safely dry wallets, papers, etc, and as waterproof covers on ignition
systems on vehicles. It is considered desirable to issue for such alternatives.
77 Caps, comforter, new type, give extra protection to the face and were satisfactory.
78 Candles, wax, give good light, and are recommended for issue on a limited scale.
79 Tablets, fuel, trioxane, are essential for pre-heating kerosene burning stoves.
80 Undershirts were found satisfactory.
30
81 Squares neck were found satisfactory.
82 Supporters athletic were found satisfactory.
83 Bags, sleeping, Arctic, were found adequately warm for the conditions
encountered.
84 Skins, caribou (undressed) were found to be one of the greatest comforts of the
exercise. Some skin, of which caribou is the best, considered necessary. Tent ground
sheets and insulating pads can then be withdrawn.
85 Windproof trousers, Canadian, were found quite satisfactory.
86 Parka caribou, were found very satisfactory in providing guaranteed warmth,
especially for the face. It is recommended that their principles of construction be
applied to issue parkas.
87 Battledress blouse, velanized, was found satisfactory. The velanizing served to
shed all snow met with on this exercise.
88 Battledress trousers, velanized, were found satisfactory.
89 Compass Prismatic, Mark III, was found quite adequate.
90 Binoculars as issued were found satisfactory.
91 Socks, GS, 3 lb[s] and Socks Heavy, 6 lbs were on the whole satisfactory, but it is
recommended that men should take the same size of each.
92 Socks, duffle, were found adequately warm.
93 Socks, cushion sole, met with general approval.
94 Insoles mukluk (blue), are a good serviceable insole about which no complaint
was made. Two pairs are necessary for extreme cold.
95 Shoepacks, Canadian type, were satisfactory when the temperature was warmer
than plus 10.
96 Boots, ski mountain (US), were found satisfactory and are recommended for
marching troops in temperatures above minus 10.
31
97 Saws rip, 24 inches, are necessary for cutting snow blocks for constructing walls,
shelters, and igloos. They are considered essential for barren ground operations.