GENERAL
1. Exercise “LOUP GAROU” was a two-sided, joint exercise.
(a) Dates: 18 Feb 54 to 1 Mar 54
(b) Area: Seven Islands, Quebec
(c) Troops Participating
(i) Friendly Force (Army)
1 R22eR (Bn HQ and two coy gps)
Tp Z Bty,1 RCHA
167
1 AB Tp, RCE
Tp 1 AB Sqn, RC Sigs
Sec 1 AB P1, RCASC
Sub-Sec 1 AB Med Sec, RCAMC
4 Coy Cdn Rangers
(ii) Friendly Force (RCAF)
9 C-119 aircraft - 436 & 438 Sqns
8 Mitchell Bombers - 406 & 418 Sqns
2 Lancasters - 408 (P) Sqn
2 Otters - ATC
4 Dakotas - ATC & 1 TAC
ACT (less GLO)
APIS (from 408 Sqn)
RPS (from 408 Sqn)
(iii)Enemy Force
One coy - 1 RCR
(d) Aim: The aims of the exercise were as follows:
(i) To test the standard of training of 1 R22eR and certain MSF supporting
arms and services in an airborne operation, under climatic conditions
encountered in the Canadian North in winter;
(ii) To exercise the RCAF in tactical and transport air support;
(iii)To test further the SOP for MSF operations and examine certain
modifications therein suggested as a result of previous exercises;
(iv)To exercise Quebec Command and 1 Tactical Air Command Staffs in
carrying out their respective roles in the event of MSF operations.
LESSONS LEARNED
2. Planning and Preparation
 Planning and preparation for a northern airborne operation must be complete
before the operation commences. In temperate climates the omissions of the planners 
168
can often be rectified in the field. This is seldom possible in the Arctic, where reinforcement
and resupply depend largely upon the coincidence of favourable flying
weather. Likewise, the initial launching of the operation is also dependent upon good
flying weather. Its timeliness will often depend very largely on the readiness of the
force to seize fleeting opportunities. From this it follows that an operation must be
mounted from the very start in adequate strength, adequately equipped and with the
troops prepared to assault on very short notice at the earliest advent of favourable
flying weather. This involves lifting the total force to be employed in one lift,
together with its immediate resupply, tactically loaded from the start in aircraft which
had no other prior commitments. No reloading of these aircraft should be necessary
between war station and assault area otherwise the force will not be capable of seizing
the fleeting opportunities of good weather which present themselves, nor will the
troops gain the maximum rest en route.
3. It is axiomatic that Headquarters should be split to prevent the total loss of
command and control if aircraft become unserviceable for any reason. This principle,
which is so well understood in amphibious combined operations, must be applied
equally to MSF airborne operations.
4. As a guide it may be taken that a force consisting of battalion headquarters and
two inf coy groups, with supporting arms and services, will be required in the assault
lift whenever the enemy lodgement is estimated as being between platoon and
company strength.
5. Reconnaissance
 Very early and accurate information on the location and strength of the enemy is
essential to ensure the effort expended in mounting the operation is commensurate
with the task in hand. This is of prime importance since it has proved necessary to
employ at least battalion headquarters and two inf coy groups, together with their
requisite supporting arms and services, to destroy an enemy lodgement in greater than
platoon strength. To estimate the enemy strength as quickly as possible, the
following action is necessary:
(a) very early air recce, both photographic and visual;
(b) the dropping of a wireless team into the area during the information
phase to contact the local defence force and provide detailed
information to orbiting aircraft;
(c) the establishment of a simple ground/air code for use by the local
defence force prior to the arrival of the air dropped wireless team.
169
6. The importance of early and accurate information cannot be overstressed.
7. Mobility
 Once on the ground, an urgent requirement exists for a prime mover, droppable
and capable of towing full loaded sleds. The carrying forward of equipment,
ammunition and casualties places a great strain on personnel and depletes the
available fighting strength of a company. Further, in the gaining of contact phase,
the towing of sleds by each sub-unit of the forward element, advancing under tactical
development, is difficult, slow and most dangerous.
8. Medical
 This exercise again emphasized the requirement for aircraft evacuation of
casualties. It is recommended that the Otter aircraft be used. Casualty evacuation
aircraft should be based on or near the DZ and should evacuate casualties to the
nearest airstrip or lake where a heavier type of aircraft could be used to carry out the
evacuation to the advanced Base. Fuel for the Otter aircraft should be included in the
resupply or brought in by heavier evacuation aircraft. If the distance to the airstrip or
lake is too great, refuelling points could be established at intervening points where
Otters could stop and refuel en route. It is considered that evacuation of casualties
should be speedy and immediate, not only for the morale factor, but also to free the
assault force of this additional responsibility with the least possible delay.
9. Rations
 It was again confirmed on this exercise that efforts must be made to reduce the
bulk and weight of pack rations. For short periods a reduction of calorie intake may
be accepted without ill effect or drop in efficiency.
10. Communications
 The need for communications between the local defence force already in the target
area and the airborne MSF force has already been emphasized under the heading
“Reconnaissance”. Past experience has shown that reliance upon air reconnaissance
alone is not likely to be sufficient. The assault force commander needs reports from
the local defence force if he is to make a sound plan prior to leaving the Advanced
Base. In particular, information from the local defence force will confirm the
strength of the enemy lodgement. This is most essential in order to ensure either that
adequate force is used against the lodgement or alternatively, that too much force is
not wastefully expended against small parties of enemy.
170
11. Long Range Communications
 It is clear that efforts must be made to reduce delays in transmission of messages
between Advanced Base and Main Base, and also between Main Base (Montreal) and
1 Tactical Air Command. The major causes of delay are
(a) Between Advanced and Main Base
(i) Enciphering and Deciphering
(ii) Ionispheric conditions
(b) Between Main Base (Montreal) and 1 Tactical Air Command
(i) Enciphering and Deciphering
12. The use of pre-arranged code words, slidex cards and other similar expedients
will reduce in part the use of cipher. Apart from this, especially on peace time
exercises where long term security must be enforced, little else can be done other than
intensive training of cipher personnel to speed traffic. Cipher personnel must not be
required to operate a set at the same time that they are employed on cipher work.
13. To overcome ionispheric conditions development work must continue on a set
capable of producing reliable communications.
