GENERAL
1. Exercise “BULL DOG” was a two-sided, joint exercise.
(a) Dates: 18 Feb 53 to 1 Nov 53
(b) Area: FORT NORMAN, NWT
(c) Troops Participating:
(i) Friendly Force (Army)
Bn HQ and two rifle coys (reinforced) 2 PPCLI
One officer and one NCO from
1 AB Tp RCR
Det AF Bde Sig Sqn
One Sec 1 AB P1 RCASC
Det 1 AB Med Sec RCAMC
21 Coy Cdn Rangers
145
(ii) Friendly Force (RCAF)
18 Dakota aircraft – 435 (T) Sqn, 412 (T) Sqn and CJATC
3 North Stars - ATC
1 Hadrian Glider - ATC
2 Lancasters - 408 Sqn RCAF
8 Mitchell Bombers
Air Contact Team (less GLO)
Joint APIS (attached to 468 Sqn)
RPS (attached to 418 Sqn
(iii) Enemy Force
70 all ranks - 2 R 22e R
(d) Aim: The aims of the exercise were as follows:
Main Aims
(i) To exercise 2 PPCLI in airborne operations on a battalion group scale.
(ii) To exercise: RCAF forces in tactical and transport air support.
(iii) To test Mobile Striking Force - Standard Operating Procedure (30 Sep
52) and Western Command Mobile Striking Force Plan.
Subsidiary Aims
(iv) To determine the extent to which non-service personnel can be
integrated into the Mobile Striking Force concept.
(v) To practice casualty evacuation from the Assault Area to the Advance
Base.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
2. Planning and Preparation
 All Mobile Striking Force exercises should take place in an area where a Mobile
Striking Force operation may have to be conducted. This is particularly desirable
from an army standpoint.
146
3. In future Mobile Striking Force exercises Army Headquarters, Air Force
Headquarters and Air Transport Command should be actually practiced in their
operational roles.
4. To ensure maximum training is obtained from Mobile Striking Force exercises
the Exercise Director, together with a small joint staff, umpires, neutral personnel and
the enemy all be provided from sources outside the command being exercised. This
would allow the Command responsible for the exercise to function as it would in an
actual emergency.
5. Once the cease fire had been announced there was a tendency to “stampede” for
home. This action made the collection of training stores and orderly movement of
troops and their equipment very difficult. The urgency of an evacuation will depend
upon the future roles of the troops and/or aircraft. The evacuation of the troops from
the assault area is a part of the operation. Future exercises should be expanded to
include this phase.
6. It is very desirable that sufficient aircraft should be immediately available to lift
infantry elements to the Advance Base. However, the need for providing alternative
means of moving troops from their unit home station to the Advance Base other than
by air should also be catered for in the Mobile Striking Force Standard Operating
Procedure.
7. If the enemy makes lodgement(s) in the Canadian North, he will have in each
case a local purpose. Speed in launching an assault to destroy the lodgement is
essential. The most important factor in these operations, after the initial strike and
reconnaissance action, is to place an infantry force on the ground in the close vicinity
of the lodgement as quickly as possible. This movement is now dependent on
transport available firstly to move troops from War Station to the Advance Base
(either by air, road or rail) and subsequently to move them again from the Advance
Base to the target area. On this exercise the time between the first warning of an
enemy lodgement and the arrival of the first company group in the assault area was
almost exactly four days.
8. In order to speed up the reduction of an enemy lodgement it would appear to be
logical to station a “duty” parachute company group at each of the selected Advance
Bases, as soon as a state of emergency becomes apparent. It would also be necessary
to station tactical air support elements in Eastern Canada. Otherwise any speeding
up gained by stationing troops at GOOSE BAY would be lost because of the time
required to move tactical support elements to this area from their present bases.
147
9. Target area brochures should be produced in two copies, one for the Main Base
and one for the Advance Base. Information for both summer and winter should
specifically state cover, routes, fordability of streams, degree of movement possible
over certain terrain, and through wooden areas, etc. Rates of travel for all seasons
should be properly established. In addition, copies of aerial photographs should be
available to Ranger companies.
10. No knowledge existed as to what the Rangers intended to do when their
settlement was attacked. Thus immediately after the initial para drop, a fire fight
took place between the Rangers and the friendly force. The general plan of action of
each Ranger Company should be known and appreciated by the Command
concerned.
11. Organization
 It is very desirable that briefing rooms should be set up at each Advance Base in
addition to normal office accommodation. This room should be maintained by the
Joint Intelligence Staffs.
12. Nearly all the RCAF portion of the joint briefing is of no value to the company
commander and attendance is a waste of his time.
13. Command and Control
 When all RCAF squadrons operate from the Advance Base airfield it is
considered that a Mobile Wing HQ is not required.
14. In accordance with the present Standard Operating Procedure the Army
Operations Commander at the Advance Base is an officer nominated by the General
Officer Commanding. This is normally the 2 IC or the senior company commander
of the Mobile Striking Force battalion to be employed. This procedure eventually
results in the commanding officer of the battalion being committed to a plan evolved
by one of his subordinates which he does not have a hand in preparing or approving.
Once the operation is launched, however, the Army Operations Commander at the
Advance Base assumes a minor role, which can be taken over by a subordinate unit
officer. As a result of this exercise, it appears advisable that the Army Operational
Commander at the Advance Base be the battalion commander who should plan the
operation. If there is a likelihood that a second company will be required to reinforce
the initial company group, he or his representative, accompanied by a tactical
headquarters, should proceed either with then initial airborne assault or prior to the
launching of the second company in order to control operations in the lodgement
area.
148
15. Throughout the exercise there was a tendency to use too much paper. Orders
and information were all passed or confirmed on paper. This led to a tendency to
wait for receipt of written operation orders before commencing to take action. While
some involved detail must be committed to paper, this should be the exception.
16. Separate situation and intelligence reports contained much duplication and
imposed an unnecessary load on communications. A combined sitrep and intrep
passed from Assault to Advance Base and from Advance Base to Main Base twice
daily should suffice. This could be augmented by flash reports as information is
available.
17. Offensive Support
 Once word of a lodgement is received, immediate consultation with Tac Air Gp
permits early joint examination of the problem, early joint selection of the Advance
Base and selection of immediate course of action. This ensures that air strike action is
brought to bear upon the target to neutralize it and keep it neutralized from the
earliest possible moment. Also air photographic reconnaissance should get over the
target as soon as possible. This immediate action could make the difference between
the enemy failing or succeeding in his mission.
18. Transport Support
 One quarter of the number of troops involved in an operation should actually be
weighed with their equipment. The weight of the parachute assembly should then be
added and an average weight established on which aircraft loads can be based.
19. It must be appreciated that an MSF operation is NOT a routine air transport
task. Therefore, the prime consideration in aircraft loading must be the tactical
requirements and not the employment of the maximum airlift potential. Only in this
way will the troops be free to function tactically as soon as they hit the Dropping
Zone. This is essential to the sound and orderly launching of the ground operation.
20. A definite basic figure for aircraft payloads must be established and tactical
loading planned accordingly. These loading plans must be firm and not subject to
change at the last minute. A consolidated manual of staff tables should be prepared
covering winter and summer operations. It should contain load tables of standard
stores and equipment for C-119 aircraft. These load tables should be worked out for
a radius of action of 750 nautical miles.
149
21. There is a definite army requirement for transport to assist in loading stores onto
aircraft. A minimum of four 3 ton trucks or their equivalent should be available at
the Advance Base at the disposal of the Mobile Striking Force ground elements.
22. Fire Support
 In operating at a distance of 600 miles from the airfield on which air support is
based, coordinating an air strike with an infantry assault is most difficult. If the
moment is propitious for the assault, it should not be delayed to await the arrival of
air support which may be held up for a variety of reasons. It is most evident that in
spite of any difficulty in ground movement, 81 mm mortars must form part of the
armament of an Mobile Striking Force company group because of their accuracy,
range and hitting power. They should be additional to the 60 mm mortar. In
addition, the desirability of using heavy mortars must not be ignored in future
planning and development.
23. Engineer Support
 In most Mobile Striking Force operations there will be specific tactical features
that will require engineer techniques. Since tasks will vary in magnitude it is
impractical to allot a definite quota of engineers to every operation. RCE
requirement should be decided by:
(a) A careful study of maps and photos of the area concerned to determine
likely engineer tasks.
(b) An engineer reconnaissance party consisting of one officer and one or
two NCOs dropping with the assault troops.
(c) Decisions based on sub para (a) above would be sufficiently accurate to
move to the Advance Base estimated number of men and equipment of
1 Airborne Tp RCE needed for tasks.
(d) The reconnaissance party would decide exact requirement to be
dropped into the assault area.
24. Reconnaissance - Visual
 Ground Liaison Officers must be most aggressive and impress on all aircrew the
necessity for visual reconnaissance.
150
25. Reconnaissance - Photo
 The photographic interpretation of ground weapons, tactics and defensive
positions requires personnel who are intimately familiar with them and the
photographic interpreter’s task is one which requires several years of study to attain
proficiency.
26. The main virtue of intelligence is the speed with which it is given to those who
are making the operational decisions. The reconnaissance element must have direct
access to and be controlled by the highest joint operational Headquarters.
27. The reconnaissance element should be directly controlled by the Advance Base
Joint Headquarters as it was during the later stages of this exercise.
28. Reconnaissance - Ground
 It is an essential part of the Army plan that local Ranger organizations give early
warning of enemy activity or lodgements. This was done on the exercise as the
enemy were slow in attacking the wireless facilities. Rangers must be thoroughly
trained to appreciate the importance of passing early and accurate warning to the
Command concerned.
29. Movement
 If the Staff Captain A & Q, Unit Emplaning Officer and Commander of 1 AB
P1 RCASC Detachment are familiar with the normal duties of an Air Transport
Liaison Officer then an Air Transport Liaison Officer is redundant in the Army
element of the Advance Base Joint Headquarters. The officer responsible for taking
over the Air Transport Liaison Officer duties must work in close cooperation with the
Air Movement Unit Officer at the Advance Base if confusion and misemployment of
aircraft is to be avoided.
30. In the road move from the War Station to the Advance Base “A” Coy moved in
separate transport from their stores. The late arrival of the latter materially affecting
the timing of the initial para assault. On Mobile Striking Force operations troops
and their operational stores must never be separated.
31. Assault Tactics
 The descent was well executed but some personnel and stores were carried well
beyond the Dropping Zone area. A parachute drop made from 1000 feet results in 
151
considerable dispersion of troops on the Dropping Zone. Consideration should be
given to having Mobile Striking Force exercise drops made from 600 feet.
32. The leading company commander felt he did not have sufficient forces on the
ground to hold the Dropping Zone, patrol vigorously and establish a patrol base. He
therefore decided to dispense with the latter. It is considered that a minimum of the
force available should remain to hold the Dropping Zone and that a patrol base as
close as possible to the enemy should be established. This eases the fatigue in
patrolling and consequent medical problems especially in severe cold weather.
33. Patrols
 Offensive action by fighting patrols is necessary at the earliest possible moment,
when an enemy position has been spotted, in order to make the enemy divulge his
fire plan and any weakness in his position. Reconnaissance is also necessary to
discover the best lines of approach, forming up places, etc, for subsequent assault.
34. Rangers were used to accompany friendly patrols and act as guides. However,
their advice was sometimes misleading as they did not appreciate the problem of
troop movement at night with heavy sleds. Active co-operation with Rangers is the
only solution to the learning of each other’s problems.
35. Ground Battle
 No procedure apparently exists for handling Prisoners of War and this aspect of
training was not given a practical test. A procedure for handling Prisoners of War
should be developed and incorporated in the Mobile Striking Force Standard
Operating Procedure or Advance Base (Standard Operating Procedure) and practiced
in future operations.
36. The battalion commander, who landed with the second company group felt,
after briefing by the leading company commander, that there was a lack of
information on which to base a sound plan of attack. It is most evident, that where
there is a possibility of the employment of more than one company group, the
battalion commander or his representative with a small tactical headquarters, should
be dropped at the same time as the leading company group or some hours before the
drop of the second company group. This gives him an opportunity of early control
of the battle and personal reconnaissance, all of which will save time in launching the
final assault(s).
152
37. Communications
 The Dropping Zone on this exercise was a large frozen lake. It was therefore
possible to land the glider on the Dropping Zone and also to tow it out again on the
conclusion of the exercise. It is difficult however to visualize how it could be safely
landed in summer conditions. For this reason consideration should be given to
airtransporting the rear link wireless set in a suitable aircraft, such as the Otter or long
range helicopter and off-loading it at the required place.
38. The rear link from the assault area to the Advance Base was maintained by a low
frequency set (PV 500) in a glider and a high frequency set (C52) which was dropped
by parachute. By this means it was possible to maintain solid communications under
adverse ionospheric conditions. Both an LF and HF set are necessary for rear link
communications. This has the added advantage of providing two operational circuits
from Assault Base to Advance Base under favourable ionospheric conditions and
reasonable assurance of communications under unfavourable conditions.
39. Difficulty was experienced in forming an efficient integrated signals team
because personnel used on the exercise came from several widely scattered units. It
was only through intensive pre-exercise training that communications were made to
work. In operations this training time would not be available.
40. To ensure teamwork amongst signals personnel from the commencement of the
operation, and to enable operators to be brought up to the standard required for a
Mobile Striking Force operation, signals personnel required for Mobile Striking Force
employment should be:
(a) Earmarked.
(b) Instructed in Mobile Striking Force procedures.
(c) Trained to the required technical standard.
Upon the individual being posted, his successor should be immediately briefed in his
Mobile Striking Force responsibilities.
41 Considerable difficulty was encountered in the selection of frequencies just prior
to the exercise. Interference by commercial and fixed military stations rendered large
portions of the spectrum unusable. Good frequencies should be selected and reserved
for Mobile Striking Force operations. These frequencies could be used on
unimportant circuits between exercises and operations to hold them open for an
emergency.
153
42. Once the glider is on the ground, glider pilots contribute little to signals
operations. Should the glider continue to be used, glider pilots should be trained in
some suitable signals trade, eg, cipher or operator (W&L).
43. Present tentage accommodation for rear link operators is cramped. The glider
should be equipped with one ten man instead of two five man tents. The rear link 52
set detachment should be equipped with one ten man and one five man tent in lieu of
two five man tents.
44. Book cipher is too slow and machine cipher is not practicable in the Assault Base
on Mobile Striking Force operations. A suitable cipher or code should be developed
to meet this need.
45. There is a requirement for a set at the Dropping Zone having a greater range
and more channels capable of being coordinated with RCAF aircraft than the present
Pye VHF set now installed in the glider. A SCR 542 set is recommended.
46. The air controller (RCAF) of the ACT did not net his wireless set with the
aircraft at the Advance Base. This may have been the reason why he was unable to
contact some of the aircraft over the Assault Area. Netting at the Advance Base
should become standard drill.
47. The WS Cdn No 58 set is not satisfactory for use by Mobile Striking Force
units. It is recommended that the AN/PRC/10 set should be issued to the Mobile
Striking Force infantry units to replace WS Cdn No 58.
48. Considerable delay was encountered in passage of information from Advance to
Main Base. The reasons for this delay were found upon examination to be:
(a) Necessity to protect the traffic with security classification requiring
enciphering.
(b) Umpire traffic with “Operational Immediate” priority being handled
by the same crypto staffs.
(c) Circuits were not reclassified for exercise purpose - eg, teletype circuit
could have been classified to handle up to “Secret”.
(d) Low frequencies circuits could have been classified to handle up to
“Restricted” since wave would have been dissipated before it reached
our actual enemies.
154
(e) Many messages were overclassified. Other messages could have been
down graded in classification by some re-wording.
(f) Of 22 messages passed from Air Ops Staff, Advance Base, to Air Ops
Staff, Main Base, 13 were franked “Operational Immediate”. It was
considered that this was a misuse of this priority classification.
(g) Intelligence and Public Relations traffic between Advance Base and
Main Base contained considerable duplication in content of messages.
Only new and pertinent information should be passed.
49. (a) In future exercises action should be taken to remove the bottle-neck of
cipher traffic which existed between Main Base and Advance Base on
this exercise.
(b) Should a backlog of traffic develop in the various communications
centres, the signal officer responsible should immediately inform the
Senior Officer at the base, so that corrective action can be taken.
(c) Air Despatch Letter Service between Advance and Assault Bases should
be used where possible.
(d) To prevent traffic delays every effort must be made to reduce the
volume of classified traffic.
50. It is most undesirable to create new addresses for signal messages for each
exercise or operation such as “BULL DOG EDMONTON” or “BULL DOG
UMPIRE EDMONTON”. It is sufficient for identification purposes if the text is
prefixed by the name of the exercise or operation.
51. Consideration should be given to the supply of small ground to air sets to
Ranger detachments.
52. Medical
 Mobile Striking Force battalions must ensure that they have at all times trained
paratrooper stretcher bearers on a minimum scale of one man per platoon.
53. The following lessons were learned on air evacuation of casualties:
155
(a) Casualties should be tagged at the Medical Inspection Room for the
tier in the aircraft they are to occupy, eg, lower tier, middle tier and
upper tier. The most serious casualties should be assigned to lower tier
positions, as these are the first to be removed from the aircraft.
(b) Army should be responsible for placing the patient on the stretcher
supplied from the aircraft, and for loading the patient into the door of
the aircraft. The Army loaders should not enter the aircraft.
(c) Each aircraft should carry a supply of casualty bags. Casualty bags can
then be exchanged, the patient remaining in the bag in which he
arrives at the aircraft.
(d) Aircraft should arrive prepared to lift its complete load of casualties.
54. Meteorology and Topography
 Because of the lack of weather reporting stations in the North, all means by
which the weather picture can be ascertained are important. All crews flying in the
area of operations should be briefed to record weather observations and transmit
them from the air if possible.
55. Training
 The prairie conditions encountered during pre-exercise training were very
different from those subsequently experienced during the exercise. The terrain all
through the McKenzie valley is dense bush and muskeg, which makes movement in
summer or winter difficult and exhausting except in cleared areas, along tracks or on
the edge of the river (when frozen). A high degree of individual and collective
infantry skills and individual mobility is required combined with the climatic and
topographical indoctrination. All this has an effect on tactical operations. In order to
practice for Northern operations, units concerned should train under reasonably
similar topographical conditions to those that they will be called upon to face on
operations. Conventional methods of forming up and assault must be adjusted to
conform to these surroundings. Deployment in line and a deliberate advance is
hardly suitable since overwhelming HE fire support will never be available. It would
appear more appropriate to aim at a quiet approach, and sudden, close in assault by
individual platoons, using fire and movement in the assault. Each platoon should be
given a separate objective within an enemy locality and the whole coordinated by a
common timing.
156
56. The jump, no matter how well executed, does not defeat the enemy. It is the
subsequent ground action which wins the battle. It should be emphasized in the
training of parachutists that the jump is only a means to an end. The lack of training
in the fitting and wearing of airborne equipment was particularly noticeable. Some of
the troops had not been instructed in the method of attaching rifle valises and
preparing them for dropping. All personnel being prepared for jumping in the North
must be thoroughly trained in the wearing and fitting of airborne equipment.
57. It is evident that the parachutist is overloaded. Some drill must be devised
whereby the parachutist drops with his personal weapon and ammunition only, and
his pack is dropped separately, possibly in section or platoon bundles, but at the same
time as the stick.
58. Since on Mobile Striking Force operations he can never expect the same fire
support which would apply in conventional warfare, the infantry parachutist must
make up this lack by perfection in the infantry skills. The parachutist must be far
better trained, collectively and individually, than his counterpart in a line battalion.
59. Both sides on this exercise were much too noisy, particularly at night when they
imagined themselves safe from the enemy. It must be emphasized during training
that well disciplined troops should live and move quietly when contact with the
enemy is even remotely possible.
60. 21 Ranger Company was not too effective in applying guerilla tactics to the
situation. The opportunity for such action is self evident. Training in small scale
raids and ambushes should be given to Ranger groups.
61. Administration
 Assault scales of rations are luxurious with the result that the more desirable
items in the 5 in 1 ration pack are often used up and the rest of the box is wasted.
Wasting food is both a matter of training and discipline and must be severely
discouraged.
62. Blankets were supplied to the company group on their arrival at the Advance
Base. Blankets are NOT required at the Advance Base for the assault element.
Sleeping bags will suffice.
157
63. Miscellaneous
 When a state of emergency was declared steps were taken by the Rangers to
block the runway. These steps could be countered by the enemy by capturing a bull
dozer. There is a requirement, therefore to prepare fuel stocks so that they could be
rendered unusable very rapidly. This might be achieved by releasing into the fuel a
chemical already contained in a small tank built within the main storage tank.
Opening drain cocks is too slow and unreliable.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
64. During the exercise both 5 man and 10 man tents were available for trial. It is
recommended that the 10 man pattern be adopted as the standard Mobile Striking
Force tent.
65. The type of Jerry cans used on BULL DOG for carrying naptha gas were
designed for carrying water. They were painted white on the inside and had a large
pouring opening. The type of flip lid on this style of can does not form a firm seal
against leaking. RCAF regulations require that gasoline containers be of the screw lid
type for transporting in aircraft. Naptha gas cans should have screw lids.
66. It was found that the Rangers easily outdistanced and outpaced the enemy. This
was partly due to the narrower snowshoes used by the former. During various patrols
and on the approach march many snowshoes were broken. It is possible that storage
or maintenance of the snowshoes is at fault as well as lack of practice by individuals.
67. During the approach march on the night 20/21 Feb the 60 mm mortar crews
were unable to keep up with the rest of the column. Every effort must be made to
produce a prime mover capable of being dropped. This will reduce the exhaustion
caused by portage of heavy man loads and the hauling of sleds.
68. In the long approach march through deep snow and thick deadfall, the system of
evacuation of casualties broke down. Whilst the lack of a forward patrol base was a
contributing factor in this breakdown, it is considered that manpower and toboggans
allocated to the move of medical equipment forward and to the evacuation of
casualties, is insufficient. A requirement exists for an airdroppable prime mover for
use in evacuation of casualties to a location where they can receive medical attention.
