GENERAL
1 This exercise dealt with technical tests and user trials conducted by Directorate,
Royal Canadian Corps of Signals (D Sigs) and Directorate of Electrical and
Communication Development (DE & CD) Trials Team. The trials were divided
into technical tests on prototype equipment and user trials on proven equipment.
2 (a) Date: Winter 1948-49
(b) Area: CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:

Seven officers and thirty-two OR.
Two CSRDE engineers accompanied the troops.
46
(d) RCAF: JSES detachment materially assisted the conduct of the trials
by providing aircraft to airdrop replacement parts required by
the trials.
(e) Aim: The aims of the trials are as follows:
(i) Radio wave propagation and earth constant
measurements.
(ii) User trials and investigations of VHF with AN/TRC
radio relay equipment. (This equipment was not made
available, therefore no tests were carried out.)
(iii) Comparison trials of low frequency and high frequency
radio sets.
(iv) User tests on dispenser type coils of field cable.
(v) User tests on lightweight barrows drum and determine
cable laying drill and technique.
(vi) User tests on Wireless Set Cdn No 29. Installations in
Snowmobiles Penguin Mk II.
(vii) User tests of Signal Wannegans.
(viii) User tests on cold temperature type primary batteries.
(ix) Investigation into the use of low frequency wireless.
(x) Investigation into the use of unattended Signal
equipment.
(xi) Design proving trials on cold weather wire and cable.
(xii) Tests on experimental steam electric generator under
arctic conditions.
(xiii) Design proving trials on mobile frequency shift,
transmitter exciter and receiver adaptor.
47
(xiv) Tests on batteries.
(xv) Design proving trials on sleds cable layer and sleds
signal shelter.
(xvi) Design proving trials on chests signal.
(xvii) In the normal course of the trial many other items of
equipment and clothing were used. Reports on these
items are also included herein.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
3 Communications Equipment
The WS Cdn 29 is a suitable set for use in the sub-Arctic as a mobile station
when mounted in a metal bodied vehicle. However, it should be thoroughly checked
and arcticized with the proper lubricants to avoid the sticking of relays and motors
before being put into service in the sub-Arctic.
4 The WS Cdn 52 gave an excellent performance on frequency 2054 kcs. 100%
communication was established between the three static stations on RT at all times
during the three varying stages of distances. The travelling vehicles operating on
2054. maintained good RT communication up to approximately 50 miles, but
beyond this distance communication was undependable. The carrying temperature
from minus to plus degrees caused a great deal of condensation on the metallic
components of the set and chassis. Trouble was experienced in the armature of the
dynamotor which shorted and several condensers shorted due to collection of
moisture.
5 The British Wireless Set No 88 proved very satisfactory except for one or two
component troubles which were due not to the cold but to heavy handling which it
would receive in any theatre. The dry batteries performed well but ceased to function
if they became cold soaked. This took about 10 hours at a temperature of -25° F.
The battery was normally carried in the parka pocket where some protection was
provided. This set is well suited to use in cold weather conditions and extreme cold
produces no operating or other difficulties except is the case of dry batteries.
6 The Wireless Set C43 and long wave transmitter effectively blocked out all
reception on the WS Cdn 52. The WS Cdn 52 was used for propagation tests and for 
48
controlling out stations, and in vehicles moving up and down the trail. Therefore the
amount of time available for long wave and RTT transmissions was limited.
7 Research should be carried out to develop a form of wave block for receivers, in
order that the transmitters will not interfere with reception.
8 More time should be devoted to the development of the 33-6-A receiver. A noise
limiter might be a worthwhile addition.
9 Hydrometers, for use in the sub-Arctic should be capable of registering specific
gravity over the range of 1150 to 1450. Inside the hydrometer should be
incorporated a thermometer capable of registering the temperature of the electrolyte
over the ranges of -50° F to 120° F. These are most essential in order to obtain
accurate readings of the condition of the electrolyte in a lead acid cell.
10 The RCA meter was unserviceable in temperature below 20° F because of the
uninsulated bias batteries freezing and failing to keep constant readings on the meter.
11 The Ferris meter was generally satisfactory if not left outside for more than twenty
minutes. At temperatures below 0° F the controls would freeze and become
unmoveable.
12 The sound powered telephone worked very satisfactorily under all conditions. No
increase of speech volume was encountered between warm and cold operation.
However, a thin membrane, which will not be affected by extreme cold temperatures,
will have to be placed over the microphone to prevent moisture from the breath
condensing in this component.
13 Generally speaking, the Trailer, Sled, Cable Layer, Type 52-4-A, is considered
satisfactory for laying field cables under sub-Arctic conditions, with modifications.
14 The Barrows Drum, WD Mk II, Arctic Light Weight, Type 20-4-0, is considered
satisfactory. It was found possible to manhandle the layer reasonably well. However,
it is recommended that the magnesium clamps on the centre spindle be replaced with
brass or steel and that the drive ratio be increased from 1:1 to 2:1 to enable faster
reeling in.
15 The Trailer Sled Signals Shelter 52-3-A came through the trail test with a
remarkable performance. The last 40 miles provided the most rigid test available in
this part of the country. At no time was any of the equipment installed dislodged or
damaged except for minor wiring faults. The Signal Shelter as provided, with small 
49
modifications, is of correct dimensions and construction to provide a mobile signal
shelter for use in sub-Arctic country.
16 The requirement for a satisfactory mobile RTT unit still exists. It is suggested
that further attempts should be made to approach a satisfactory unit.
17 The Onan 2 KW is a satisfactory power plant for use in sub-Arctic conditions
when used remotely to a Sled Signal Shelter. With better electrical suppression,
better ventilation and better shock mounting it would be suitable for mounting in a
shelter. Used as a heating device in the Sled Signal Shelter it is definitely practicable
provided proper ventilation is planned.
18 The system of mounting one Onan plant on top of the other was unsatisfactory
and caused a lot of vibration. A plant producing more power should be installed and
properly shock-mounted to cut down the vibration. The power plants must be
extremely well suppressed.
19 Considerable trouble was experienced, electrically and mechanically, from the
power plants located inside the wannegans. This was overcome by establishing an
outside power source.
20 The kites, balloons and [antennae] wire are a quick and easy means of erecting
vertical antennae when weather conditions and terrain are suitable in sub-Arctic
conditions. They are NOT dependable for a 24 hour a day wireless link unless a
large supply of balloons hydrogen and antennae wire are on hand. As an emergency
measure they are quite satisfactory. For use in sub-Arctic country these are the only
type of long vertical antennae that can be erected unless large and bulky antennae
gear can be carried.
21 It is recommended that a light braided flexible antennae wire easily handled in
cold climates should be provided. All antennae should be issued on reels rather than
as loose coils. Insulated antennae wire should be provided to offset noise caused by
blowing snow. Standoff insulators should be provided on Signal Shelters to facilitate
lead-ins from horizontal antennaes. The tentacles on the crows foot counterpoise
should be soldered more ruggedly to the centre plate to avoid constant breaks at this
point.
22 The results all tend to show that a vertical antennae gives by far the best results.
This is in accordance with the familiar radiation patterns obtained from horizontal
and vertical antennae at these frequencies. The angle of radiation from the horizontal
antennae is much too high and all the radiated power is lost.
50
23 All types of lead acid cells to be used in the sub-Arctic must be initially charged
and cycled at a temperature of 70°F before being put into use in the extreme cold.
Other types of secondary cells should be tested to determine whether the lead acid
cell is the most efficient secondary cell at sub-zero temperatures.
24 Communication equipment will have to be made more ruggedly, so that the
various pieces will not break into electronic oscillation when subjected to vibrations.
All equipment installed in the wannegan will have to be well suppressed, filtered, or
bonded, so that it will not cause interference to other equipment.
25 Personal Equipment
Vests string proved satisfactory. However, many of the vests issued shrunk badly
and would not tuck into the waist band of the trousers. Larger sizes should be made
available.
26 The parka coat with liner, modified, was not entirely satisfactory. The hood does
not permit freedom of movement, and the depth and height of the hood is not
sufficient to provide complete protection from the wind.
27 Mitts, winter, Arctic, outer, were reasonably satisfactory. There was, however, too
much bulk in the palm. The cuff was not sufficiently stiff and as a result it was
difficult to put on and take off quickly. The durability was fair.
28 Mitts, winter, Arctic liner, was completely unsatisfactory. The bulk was too large
to permit any manual dexterity. Most of the men on the exercise did not use them at
all. Mitts woolen, heavy, were found to be sufficiently warm in almost all cases.
29 Boots, mukluk, modified, were completely unsatisfactory. The sole was too
heavy, and the body of the boot was too fragile and bulky. The use of newer type
mukluks has shown that the damage to uppers is minimized by a snug top. Lighter
weight soles have also proven satisfactory.
30 Socks duffle, modified, were not satisfactory. They have not sufficient shape to
prevent the foot turning, and the bulk is excessive for the amount of warmth
provided.
31 Caps, comforter, proved useful and satisfactory.
32 Goggles, brow rest, were not satisfactory. The plastic lenses break easily and fog
up. They cannot be worn over ordinary eyeglasses.
51
33 Group Equipment
Tents, Arctic, lightweight, 5-man, were found to be generally satisfactory.
However, they were difficult to pitch, and the tent pole as issued is absolutely useless.
It is recommended that a new Arctic tent be made and tested.
34 Tents, Wireless, were used for stores, rations, and mess tents. Some of these tents
had been “flame proofed”. The compound used made them very stiff and unwieldy
and dark in texture. The canvas in one tent cracked when it was folded in the cold.
Due to the colour artificial light had to be used at all times in flameproof tents