GENERAL
1 Exercise “SUN DOG TWO” was a two-sided, joint exercise.
2 (a) Dates: 14 Feb 51 - 23 Feb 51
(b) Area: FORT CHURCHILL, NUNNALLA Area
(c) Troops Participating:
(i) Friendly Force - 1 Coy Group 1 RCR
Det Lt Bty RCA
Det RCE
Tp RC Sigs
Det RCASC
Det RCAMC
Det RCEME
(ii) Enemy Force - 1 P1 1 R 22e R
Det RCE
(iii) The RCAF provided tactical and transport support to the
friendly force.
(d) Aim: The aim of the exercise was to:
(i) Compare the relative efficiency of parachute assault in the
Arctic with a co-ordinated attack by an air-transported
force.
(ii) Exercise Canadian Army/Royal Canadian Air Force
(RCAF) staffs in joint planning for airborne, air-transported
winter operations.
94
(iii) Exercise the First Battalion Royal Canadian Regiment (1
RCR) in airborne/air-transported operations on a company
group scale.
(iv) Reassess the problems of maintaining a force in the barren
lands.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Tactical loading of aircraft is a must. All components must be loaded in
“packets”, eg, infantry sections, RCAF, etc.
4 A three day supply of rations and naphtha is the maximum amount of each
commodity that can be carried by airborne troops on “D” Day.
5 Sufficient stores should be held in mobilization reserve to permit the speedy
equipping of a force to operate in the north.
6 A representative of Air Transport Command should attend the first joint
conference.
7 Tactical and Technical Investigation Section (TTIS) of the Canadian Joint Air
Training Centre should be responsible for planning of aircraft loads.
8 The Army Headquarters’ conference should be held at an early date to allow the
Army directive to be issued as early as possible, to allow the Command concerned to
proceed with planning.
9 A small permanent planning staff, on an Army/RCAF basis, should be set up to
carry out preliminary planning on northern exercises. This staff would operate under
the Command Headquarters concerned once the preliminary Army Headquarters
directive had been issued. The Command in whose area the exercise is to be
conducted would be responsible for the detailed planning of the exercise and the
provision of additional planning staff.
10 The Command conducting the exercise should be permitted to deal directly with
participating units. Copies of all such correspondence could be sent to Commands
concerned for information.
95
11 Very careful planning for the number of troops required from arms and services
should be carried out at an early date. These should be sufficient to allow for preexercise
casualties due to sickness, accidents, etc.
12 Air members of the Joint Headquarters should be separate personnel from those
concerned in the actual operation of aircraft.
13 The Joint Headquarters should be in the same building with Army and RCAF
opposite numbers in the same offices.
14 The roles of Commander and Exercise Director should not be combined.
15 The weight capacity of aircraft participating should be known well ahead of time.
16 The briefing should be carried out as soon as possible after the arrival of the
troops at the Advance Base.
17 Organization
A Forward and Rear Air Supply Organization, or personnel to carry out these
requirements, is required.
18 A ground liaison officer should be provided on all future exercises of this nature.
19 The Enemy Force should be transported to their exercise position by air.
20 Extra LMGs, 75 mm and LAA guns, and oversnow vehicles should be allotted to
the Enemy Force.
21 The Enemy Force should be equipped with wireless down to and including
sections.
22 RCEME should be responsible for all field repairs.
23 Command and Control
The commander should decide when, where, and the number of personnel to be
committed.
24 Offensive Support
More active use of offensive air support in Arctic operations must be considered.
96
25 Transport Support
Norseman aircraft equipped with skis can land close to most objectives without
prior air strip preparation.
26 The RCAF should be responsible for evacuation of personnel and equipment after
the exercise proper has been completed.
27 Engineer Support
Clearing the snow down to the ice is the most practical method of constructing a
forward air strip.
28 During the winter season, preparation of air strips for light or medium bomber
type aircraft is feasible. There are large numbers of lakes on the barrens which are
ideally suited.
29 Reconnaissance
Continuous research should be made in respect to photography, navigation,
pinpointing and relocating areas once photographed, and pathfinding tactics. Year
round practice should be carried out.
30 Aerial reconnaissance is essential.
31 Army personnel should be provided as photo interpreters on future exercises. The
importance of the experience gained through participation in such exercises cannot be
over-emphasized.
32 Further study should be made of the whole question of ground reconnaissance.
33 Personnel should be selected for duty in northern areas to learn how to live, move
and fight. They could form the nucleus for reconnaissance parties required in future
operations and exercises.
34 A special light ration should be provided for reconnaissance parties.
35 A light wireless set should be made available with a range of 25 miles for
reconnaissance parties. The set would provide communications from the party’s base
camp to roving patrols.
97
36 An Army representative should accompany long range reconnaissance aircraft
during visual reconnaissance and when oblique photographs are being taken.
37 Five to seven days should be allowed for full coverage by air reconnaissance.
38 Every advantage must be taken of suitable weather conditions.
39 The commander of Own Forces should arrive at the Advance Base before, or as
soon after the long range reconnaissance airplanes as possible.
40 Movement
On a number of occasions, light vehicles deviated from the route and
consequently created a number of tracks over which light vehicles could traverse. In
so doing, they misled heavy tractors into rough country and rendered night travel
difficult. All routes must be marked clearly and no deviations should be allowed. A
requirement exists for a suitable type of road marker which can be employed during
either night or day movement.
41 Assault Tactics
There is no tactical difference, theoretically speaking, between an operation
conducted on the barrens in the winter and one carried out in any other area. Troops
can be dropped in the Arctic during the winter and, in turn, live, move and fight.
42 The overhead landing method visualized by many, when speaking of
“smothering” tactics, is considered false and not practical and should only be
employed when conditions of weather, ground and enemy disposition ensure
successful conclusion of the operation.
43 The administrative DZ must be secured before resupply takes place. This applies
to any airborne operation but is particularly important to northern operations due to
requirement for survival equipment.
44 Personnel parachuting in the Arctic should do so with a minimum of equipment.
45 Personnel should be rested during periods of inclement weather thus enabling
them to take advantage of every opportunity to mount the assault.
98
46 Ground Battle
If paratroops or air-landed troops are to be used, a re-organizing period once on
the ground must be granted. In order to do so, troops must land some distance from
enemy position - out of range of small arms fire is the suggested distance.
47 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
All camouflage positions gave good protection against ground observation but
were obvious to air reconnaissance. However, the use of camouflage main positions
with several alternative positions confuse both ground and air attackers.
48 Communication
Cipher should only be used when there is the possibility of enemy interception in
sufficient time to allow them to take counter-action.
49 The possible use of a system of code words should be investigated.
50 Some standardization in frequency range of Army and RCAF wireless equipment
is necessary.
51 An exhaustive study of communications in the north by a special committee is
strongly recommended.
52 Medical
Medical authorities should be advised as to what casualties may be expected.
53 Meteorology and Topography
The meteorologist who is to attend the exercise should be selected early and the
requirements made known to him. He should be brought into the planning as early
as possible.
54 Selection and Training of Personnel
Familiarization training for Arctic operations must be carried out in an area
similar to where the exercise is to be conducted.
55 The troops must be physically and mentally fit. The responsibility of junior
leaders towards their men is increased, especially during periods of rest.
99
56 Selection and training of umpires should be made early in the planning stages and
their selection should be governed by past experience. All umpires should have
northern experience prior to their participating in the exercise.
57 All personnel proceeding on northern exercises should be interviewed by their
commanding officers to ensure that compassionate cases do not exist.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
58 Modification to Existing Equipment
Zipper screens should be provided for the doors in aircraft carrying personnel into
the assault.
59 Modifications to our present types of vehicles should be undertaken immediately
pending procurement of Beavers and Wapitis. This is particularly applicable to the
Penguin.
60 The X51 trousers and X50 parka (modified with crupper for use as jump smock)
should be adopted for northern areas.
61 The feasibility of adopting USA books, winter, rubber, for wear in the Arctic
should be investigated.
62 The X51 jacket, if used, should be lengthened to protect the kidneys and fitted
with a crupper so that it may be used as a jump smock.
63 The provision of tentage should be carefully investigated. The 5-man tent is
favoured for use by outlying parties whereas the 15-man tent allows for better
control, economy of manpower and reduction in overall weight.
64 New Developments Required
No satisfactory battery for use in cold weather operations has yet been designed.
Priority should be given to this subject.
65 The Canadian 5-in-1 ration pack is satisfactory, but can be improved upon.
100
66 An aircraft, suitable for carrying equipment necessary in the construction of
airfields, is required. At least two C-119 aircraft should be obtained either by
purchase or by United States participation in our northern exercises.
67 More modern photographic equipment is required for air photography.
68 A light long-wave set with a range of 200 miles should be developed.
69 A lighter cable for line communication should be procured.
70 A suitable type of mechanized toboggan should be developed. The vehicle must
operate with a minimum of noise.
71 A larger and better “flare pot” for marking of airfields should be investigated.
72 The RCAMC should be provided with a tent suitable for use as an operating
room. The British 10-man tent appears to satisfy this requirement.
73 A more efficient casualty bag is required.
74 A portable, lightweight shelter should be developed in which maintenance and
field repairs can be conducted.
75 RCEME should carry out trials on canvas shelters during winter 1051-52.
76 The Canadian Silva Compass should be provided for northern operations.
77 Matches must not be packed in the ration packs as the RCAF or commercial
carriers will not transport them.
