GENERAL
1. Exercise BULLDOG II was a two-sided, joint exercise.
(a) Dates: 1 - 14 Dec 54
(b) Area: Fort Churchill, Man.
(c) Troops participating
171
(i) Friendly Force (Army)
1 RCR
Tp (less one sec) Z Bty (Para) 1 RCHA
Tp 1 AB Sqn, RC Sigs
Sec 1 AB P1, RCASC
Sub-Sec 1 AB Med Sec, RCAMC
1 APIS
24 Coy CDN Rangers, Fort Churchill
(ii) Friendly Force (RCAF)
10 C119 aircraft - 435, 436 Sqns and CJATC
2 Lancasters - 408 (P) Sqn
2 Otters - ATC and RCAF Unit, Fort Churchill
4 Dakotas - ATC and 1 TAC
JAPIS
RPS from 408 (P) Sqn
ACT (less GLO)
(iii)Enemy Force
One coy - 1 R 22e R
(d) Aim: The aims of the exercise were as follows:
(i) To exercise 1 RCR and the participating MSF supporting arms and
services in the conduct of MSF operations in winter;
(ii) To exercise participating units, both Army and RCAF, in carrying out
the drills contained in their respective SOPs;
(iii) To exercise the RCAF in aerial recce and transport air support;
(iv) To exercise the staffs of HQ Western Command and Tactical Air
Command in carrying out their respective roles in the event of an MSF
operation.
LESSONS LEARNED
Meteorology and Topography
172
2. A Meteorological SOP is a necessary adjunct to the MSF SOP. Provision of the
best possible meteorological advice is important to the success of a MSF operation
and confers increased flexibility of plan on the Assault Force Commander.
3. A Staff Meteorologist (Army) is required at Advanced Base Joint Headquarters as
an adviser to the Army Commander, particularly for the interpretation of
meteorological information received and to assist in the selection of suitable DZs.
This latter function is important because physical terrain conditions affect surface
wind speeds considerably. Selection of a DZ must be made with this factor in mind
and due regard must be paid to the formation of neighbouring ground features.
Failure to consider the meteorological factor when selecting a DZ may lead to serious
mishap during the drop owing to purely local wind speeds over the DZ being far in
excess of the surface speeds predicted generally for the area.
4. In order to assist accurate general weather forecasting the RCAF should be
prepared to fly special aircraft weather reconnaissance missions as may be necessary.
Weather reconnaissance may be considered a normal requirement in support of
northern airborne operations.
Training
5. Advanced Base Joint Headquarters is an ‘ad hoc’ formation brought together for
each operation/exercise. The smooth functioning of the Headquarters from the
outset cannot be expected unless adequate training is carried out. The personnel
involved are subject to the normal posting policies in effect within both services.
This results in periodic rotation of the staff. Signals and planning exercises should be
conducted from time to time for the training of the staff and to improve the
organization of the Headquarters.
6. Whenever possible a full scale dress rehearsal exercise should precede the exercise
proper. This will permit the ironing out of minor procedural details within the Bn
Gp and will allow the various elements forming the Assault Force to become familiar
with one another. Continuation training exercises should also be used for this
purpose.
7. Adequate training must be carried out to permit the mounting of an operation by
night. The short winter days coupled with adverse weather conditions may well
necessitate a night parachute descent, particularly as night wind speeds in some areas
tent to be lower than those prevailing during daylight. Aircrews likely to be assigned
to the MSF should be trained in night formation flying and night navigation. Army
MSF units should carry out night parachute training. All unit parachutists should 
173
complete at least one night jump per year. DZ drills must be efficient and must be
practiced to ensure that control is not lost should a night operation be necessary.
8. Continued emphasis must be placed on the fact that parachuting is only a means
to an end. Good ground drills and sound tactics are most important and must
become a second nature.
9. Parachutist tension and fatigue presents a serious problem. A number of measures
have been recommended to minimize the effects of each. These should be observed
by units as part of their normal training. Research should continue with a view to the
more complete elimination of conditions leading to tension and fatigue.
Preparation and Planning
10.This exercise again confirmed the requirement for sufficient aircraft to lift the
Assault Force consisting of Bn HQ, two Coy Gps and essential supporting elements
tactically loaded in one lift from War Station via Advanced Base to Target Area. In
addition, the exercise indicated that maintenance difficulties with the C119 under the
severe weather conditions likely to be encountered during a winter operation call for a
higher than average percentage of standby aircraft in order to ensure that the number
operational at any time does not fall below the required minimum.
11. A study should be made to determine ways and means of reducing the aircraft
unserviceability factor. This applies particularly to aircraft becoming unserviceable at
the last moment when the force is already assembled for take-off.
Command and Control
12. A system of Decision Schedules was developed to prevent needless alerts for the
troops and aircrews, followed by subsequent aborting of the operation due to adverse
weather. This system is a good one and should be continued.
13. Factors to be considered when preparing the Decision Schedule for each
operation are:
(a) Location of Advanced Base in relation to Target Area;
(b) Season of the year;
(c) Hours of daylight;
174
(d) Local conditions at Advanced Base, ie, distances from assembly area,
briefing rooms and personnel accommodation to aircraft.
Organization
14.The Assault Force is heavily loaded down with the present scales of ammunition,
rations and survival equipment. Efforts must be made to reduce these scales in order
that greater mobility may be achieved. This should result in bolder manoeuvre. A
small prime mover is urgently required and development work should be continued
to produce a vehicle capable of year-round use. The prime mover must be
airdroppable.
Reconnaissance
15.The requirement for aircraft weather reconnaissance missions has already been
stated in para 4.
16.This exercise again confirmed the importance of good air photos. They should
not be relied upon as the sole means of information however. Winter photographic
light is generally poor and in northern latitudes the duration of daylight is extremely
short in mid-winter. Increased night and low light photographic capability must be
developed. Until this is achieved more emphasis should be placed on visual
reconnaissance reports by Rangers or any other local defence force elements that may
exist, relayed through a wireless contact team placed in the area by the infantry
battalion involved. In addition, pilots of strike or other aircraft capable of flying to
and from the Target Area should be briefed on the information required in order to
provide an additional means of obtaining information.
17.The Bn Commander and/or Senior members of the Assault Force should be
prepared to take advantage of delays caused by weather unsuitable for para dropping,
or the unserviceability of aircraft, to carry out visual reconnaissance of the Target
Area using such light aircraft as may be available. In addition annual visits by unit
commanders should be paid to the Target Areas within their area of responsibility in
order that target brochures may be kept up to date and outline plans be made in
advance.
Communications
18. “The CPRC 26 wireless set was designed for use between coy and pls, for which it
is entirely suitable. It has not sufficient range for use between bn and coys and
should not be employed in this role. The CPRC 10 or 510 should be issued for bn
to coy communications as soon as these sets have been accepted and are available.”
175
19. A study should be made of the wireless communications required by the medical
sub-section. A requirement has been indicated for communications between RAP
and Air Evacuation Post (AEP), and between the AEP and the Otter aircraft carrying
out casualty evacuation. In addition, it may be necessary to provide communications
between RAP and Bn HQ, should these become separated for any reason.
Administration
20. Accommodation at the Advanced Base should be allocated whenever possible by
aircraft loads. This will enable personnel to be called for briefing or emplaning with a
minimum of confusion and delay. For exercises only, friendly force officers should be
quartered separately from press representatives, air crews, observers and umpires. The
activities of personnel not engaged in the operation will in this way cause no
interference to members of the Assault Force and will not interfere with their rest
prior to take-off. In addition, the grouping of friendly force officers in one place will
simplify calling them for briefings and O groups as necessary.
21. A study should be made of the practicability of preparing standard survival and
personnel monorail aircraft loads. Insofar as is possible tent group loads should be
interchangeable throughout the force. These common loads should be hung on the
forward hooks in each aircraft leaving the rearward hooks available for special
equipment loads such as mortars, signal and medical, etc. If this practice is followed
the difficulties of exchanging special loads from one aircraft to another in the event of
unserviceability will be kept to a minimum.
22. A drill must be established within each unit to check monorail loads daily in the
aircraft whenever the weather is unsuitable for dropping for any length of time. If
this is not done loads left unchecked may stretch their A7A containers, resulting in
free fall when the opening shock of the cargo chute strikes the load.