GENERAL
1 This exercise was a dry-cold, one-sided joint manoeuvre. Detailed facts
supporting the findings of this exercise are contained in volumes 1, 2, 3 and
appendices titled WINTER WARFARE, RESEARCH PROGRAMME, 1944-45
EXERCISE “ESKIMO”, issued by the General Staff, Department of National
Defence, Canada.
2 (a) Date: 16 Jan - 25 Feb 1945
(b) Area: NORTH CENTRAL, SASKATCHEWAN, PRINCE
ALBERT, LAC la RONGE area
 (c) Troops Participating:
One Bde Gp composed as follows:
1 RCAC Recce Tp
RCA Fd Bty
RCA Tp LAA
RCE Fd Coy
RC Sigs Det
RCE of C
HLI of C
WLI
RCAMC Fd Amb
CDC Det
RCEME LAD (3)
C Pro C Sec
 (d) RCAF: RCAF participation on this exercise consisted of close support and
transport support.
 (e) Aim: On 31 Jul 44, the Minister of National Defence approved the
exercise for the study of the following problems in relation to
military operations under extreme Canadian winter conditions is
typical sub-Arctic terrain:
3
(i) Mobility, or extent to which a Force could operate beyond
base or railroad, and nature of maintenance echelons
required to support progressive extension of operations
beyond base or railroad.
(ii) Most effective scales and types of standard or special
transport and equipment required.
(iii) Movement of troops, heavy equipment and supplies,
concealment and camouflage from air and ground, and
engineer problems.
(iv) Conditions affecting supplementary supply by air in
conjunction with ground supply echelons, and other
conditions of air-ground co-operation and communication.
(v) Study of the variations from accepted tactical doctrine
which would be imposed by the winter conditions of snow
and extreme cold.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Although the emphasis on planning in modern military doctrine is already
paramount, there is no situation where it applies with greater force than in winter
operations. The sustained morale and combat efficiency of a force, and its depth of
penetration towards distant objectives, may be regarded as directly proportional to
the time and intelligence devoted to the planning task. A normal part of this
planning in all operations is reconnaissance by air and ground. Whereas Europe and
many other potential battlefields of the world have been mapped and meticulously
reconnoitred by successive generations of officers, much the greater part of Canada
(perhaps 95%) has never received such attention. One of the greatest lessons of this
exercise is the need revealed for a progressive programme, during the years of peace,
whereby all of Canada, up to the Barren Lands at least, will be mapped and
reconnoitred by officers of both Reserve and Active lists. It has been said that the
soldier makes good the planning errors of the staff. This may be true in ordinary
country and in milder seasons. In winter, as it must be faced in the Canadian north,
the soldier has enough to do to survive, to move and to fight against both the enemy
and winter. The planning mistakes of a staff officer are less likely to be rectified. The
sub-Arctic leaves a very narrow margin between successful planning and disaster.
4
4 Transport Support
Owing to the vast distances and lack of roads in the sub-Arctic, it may in future
be considered expedient for a striking force to be conveyed to, and to work from,
successive airheads. Although fourteen different types of air support and supply
operations were used on this exercise[,] these may be usefully extended in future, both
in number and type, to the great tactical advantage of our ground forces. Many
serious air problems in winter warfare remain to be solved, including proper use of
gliders and glider snatch in winter bush-covered terrain; design of gliders and
transport craft to carry oversnow vehicles, including the latest types; effective defence
of airheads; compacting of snow for landing heavy transport planes at advanced
airfields, denial of lake airheads to an enemy by developing a better type of icechurning
delayed action bomb; accurate indication of bomb line; proper scale of
equipment for light airborne raiding detachments.
5 It was evident that normal procedures can generally be followed and standard
equipment utilized to supply ground forces by air under conditions of extreme cold.
6 The numerous lakes common to sub-Arctic terrain provide a plenitude of landing
grounds for ski-equipped aircraft in winter operations. These frozen surfaces may be
employed both for air landing and air dropping of supplies and for air-landed combat
troops.
7 Extreme cold accentuates the need for rapid evacuation of all seriously wounded
to the rear. Therefore, air evacuation should be employed whenever feasible.
8 Most ration items will be frozen because of the low temperatures. Therefore, it is
possible to free drop a wider variety of fresh rations and to simplify packing.
9 Engineer Support
It is now considered that the heavy demands on engineer services during this
exercise may, in future, partly be obviated by airportability and air support and by the
observance of principles set forth in (14) below. South of the sub-Arctic line, the
clearance and maintenance of roads and tracks will, however, continue to place some
additional strain on the engineers. One of the unusual functions of the engineers,
which was performed on this exercise with great skill, was the clearance of bivouac
areas to permit immediate halting of a force in a position of defence with maximum
concealment, with orderly routing of supply vehicles, and with prompt movement to
the next Starting Line.
5
10 The limitation of performance in snow of all vehicles, both wheeled and tracked,
places special emphasis on road construction and clearing, and an added
responsibility on the engineers. Increases in the scale of issue of road building
equipment and operating personnel are considered necessary.
11 Engineer road clearing detachments should move with or immediately behind the
vanguard, preparing roads as speedily as possible, to avoid too great a separation
between oversnow equipped echelons and road-bound echelons.
12 Reconnaissance
One of the distinguishing features of sub-Arctic terrain is the vast stretches of
wooded areas devoid of readily recognizable landmarks and so flat that observation on
the ground is very restricted. This factor, together with the absence of accurate maps,
makes the location and identification of targets and dropping zones difficult and
necessitates increased air co-operation for the following tasks:
(i) Air photography to supplement existing maps.
(ii) Air observation for artillery.
(iii) Aerial road reconnaissance for engineers.
13 Because of limitations in cross-country performance of transport in heavily
wooded areas, increased reliance must be placed on reconnaissance by air, and
dismounted movement of reconnaissance troops.
14 Mobility
Wheeled vehicles tend to render a force road-bound in winter. All fighting and
“A” echelon unit vehicles should therefore be tracked. South of the sub-Arctic line
there are usually sufficient roads and tracks to warrant the use of wheeled vehicles in
“B” echelon and in supporting convoys. North of the sub-Arctic line a commander
should be able to depend altogether on oversnow vehicles or alternatively on supply
by air. Otherwise his initiative in selecting alternative routes of advance, and in
deploying his force, will be seriously restricted. Moreover, his pace would have to
conform to that of his engineers and of his road-bound “tail”. All vehicles to be used
north of the 1000 kg wind-chill line should be winterized to -20°F. Arcticization to -
40°F is essential for vehicles used north of the 1400 kg wind-chill line. Failure to do
so involves a disproportionate number of man-hours on starting and maintenance
and places undue limitations on mobility.
6
15 Given adequate equipment and training, it is considered that a force can operate
in dry-cold continental winter conditions, beyond base or railhead, over equal
distances and in the same manner as in a temperate climate. The daily rate of
advance would vary widely because of terrain and weather conditions without
considering enemy action. The operation of the lines of communication presents no
unusual difficulties and maintenance echelons generally would require no changes
other than a marked increase in road building equipment and personnel.
16 Movement generally, whether of troops, heavy equipment, or supplies, has be[en]
achieved with wheeled vehicles and normal method wherever roads are available but
these vehicles are road-bound. Oversnow movement requires tracked oversnow
vehicles for transport of all types. Oversnow performance, however, does not mean
unlimited cross-country performance. Bush, trees and the unfrozen muskeg
commonly encountered in sub-Arctic regions, form barriers which necessitate the use
of special equipment and methods, or re-routing.
17 To move on foot ahead of or away from a cleared road or trail, troops require skis
or snowshoes. All marching troops, and those who would benefit by the speed
normally conferred by skis, should be so equipped. Mounted troops, who usually do
not move or fight on foot, should be equipped with snowshoes for dismounted
movement and action.
18 Assault Tactics
Deployment for the attack requires more time than in other seasons and in settled
areas. The slower pace due to cold; the obstacles of windfall, muskeg and drifted
snow; the care required in describing and defining assembly areas, positions and unit
boundaries in a country which lacks the normal means of orientation; the exacting
demands of bush navigation; the short hours of daylight; all of these and other factors
require intensive pre-training of commanders, staff and troops to appreciate properly
the factors of time and space. During the attack the use and effect of support
weapons is limited by the factors already outlined, and by the deadening effect of
snow on artillery shell and mortar bomb. All of the foregoing applies to an attack in
force. Attacks by small airborne infantry, or light armoured raiding detachments,
especially when directed at L of C installations, offer special advantages and may be
regarded as normal in this type of operation.
19 Survival stores such as sleeping bags, tents and heaters, should be carried in “A”
echelon vehicles. In certain circumstances they will be carried on, or towed behind,
“F” echelon vehicles, or even be snow-packed.
7
20 Patrols
Flank guards should be supplemented by wireless equipped standing patrols or
listening posts at frozen lakes near the axis. Such lakes are potential landing zones
and dropping zones for enemy airborne troops.
21 Ground Battle
No variations from accepted combat principles or tactical doctrine are imposed by
conditions of snow and extreme cold. This conclusion is based directly on the
premise that the force is so equipped and trained that it can attain, and retain,
mobility. Experience gained on the exercise suggests certain changes in method of
application of accepted tactical doctrine in the advance, attack, defence and
withdrawal.
22 In the assault, speed is reduced by difficult footing in soft, deep snow and
movement is very exhausting. Particular attention should be given to closing with
enfilade fire the interval between the cessation of high-trajectory supporting fire and
the arrival of troops on the objective.
23 Attacking troops should be given early relief by reserve troops.
24 Consolidation should be carried out by reserve troops to permit the bringing up
of survival stores to protect fatigued attacking troops from the cold.
25 Exploitation should be the role of reserve units.
26 Defence
It is a truism of modern war that every unit and sub-unit, including any
formation HQ, is responsible for its own all-around defence, at all times. This
exercise illustrates the special difficulties of, and the exceptional emphasis on this rule
which will be encountered by a force which may be engaged in operations in the subArctic
continental bush-covered plain. In the first place such operations are
essentially of the Long Range Penetration type, exemplified by Wingate’s first raid
into Burma in 1943. The close and difficult country, the emphasis on concealment
and deception, the unvarying alertness demanded of every officer and man, the
constant expectation of attack or ambush from any quarters, the maintenance of
distant objectives - these characteristics are common to all “LRP” operations. In
winter, however, in addition to all the above, there is the preoccupation of all ranks
with the ordinary problems of survival, of living and moving in acute cold and
windchill, of carrying out vehicle maintenance under special handicaps, of more 
8
frequent reliefs for sentries. Mental and physiological reactions are seriously retarded.
Moreover the creation of defensive positions is complicated by frozen ground
alternating with unfrozen muskeg. All of these factors combine to render defence on
the move, or at rest, unusually difficult.
27 More frequent relief of sentries and provision of sentry shelters are considered
necessary.
28 Concealment is difficult in snow-covered terrain. Conversely, more opportunities
exist for deception in this terrain than in any other.
29 The use of explosives in preparing defences will be increased.
30 Preparation of defences will require greatly increased effort in frozen ground. Ice
and ice concrete defences may be substituted satisfactorily, where a position is being
held for 24 hours or longer.
31 Every well-frozen lake being a potential landing ground for enemy airborne
troops, additional patrols and other protective measures for lines of communication
installations are considered necessary. Every detached sub-unit and installation must
adopt and maintain an all-around defence, on the move or at rest.
32 Withdrawal
Reconnaissance parties should be increased in size by the addition of advanced
guards or working parties for the preparation of defences and erection of tents.
33 Whenever possible infantry of rear guards should be withdrawn by vehicle as
withdrawal on foot, even on skis, can be slow and very fatiguing.
34 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
A high standard of training and versatility in track discipline, and in the use of
deception and concealment, is essential to successful operations over snow. Special
winter camouflage clothing and equipment is required.
35 A force operating in snow-covered terrain should be completely equipped to
conform to either a light or a dark background. With proper attention to equipment,
training and camouflage discipline, it is possible for the general concealment of a
force to be of a high standard. Many ideal opportunities of presenting to the enemy
false signs of strength and intention by the use of deceptive display occur in this type
of terrain.
9
36 Communications
Laying and maintaining line in snow and bush-covered country demands an
increased proportion of line laying detachments. In this connection full use should
be made of wire laying by aircraft. Provision of good air-ground communications
and development of a small portable long wave transmitter for use as an alternative to
short wave in the auroral zone are important.
37 Medical
Extreme cold demands for casualty evacuation the highest degree of efficiency and
improvisation, as well as special oversnow equipment and adequate personnel. Air
evacuation from advance landing fields may be regarded as an essential feature.
38 Meteorology and Topography
Meteorological forecasts are not only essential for the air force but also for ground
forces. The experience of this exercise indicates that forecasts were sufficiently
accurate, up to 24 hours and even longer, for commanders and staff to plan usefully
on a short term basis, both on tactical and administrative matters, where these were
conditioned by anticipated temperature, precipitation and wind velocity.
39 Selection and Training of Personnel
The ordinary functions of survival demand more time, energy and skill than
under temperate conditions. All troops therefore require intensive pre-training in
winter camp craft and movement. Inexperienced troops will require up to ten hours
a day, apart from sleep, just to make and break camp and to live. Winter-adapted
troops, properly equipped, can cut this time to three hours. Such winter training will
require eight to twelve weeks even for troops of combat calibre.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
40 New Developments Required
For a division in winter operations a requirement exists for tracked oversnow
vehicles of all types, comparable in function and capacity with the present wheeled
vehicles. This replacement would be necessary only for vehicles operating in forward
areas (eg “F” and “A” echelons of combat units, RCASC task vehicles, RCAMC
vehicles and RCEME recovery vehicles) and not necessarily for the full scale of
transport. Scales of vehicles are generally adequate but additional load-carrying 
10
capacity is required by combat units which would necessitate an upward revision of
approximately twenty per cent in present scales. All vehicles require winterizing or
arcticizing to ensure quick starting and efficient operation at low temperatures.