GENERAL
1 Exercise “POLAR BEAR” was conducted as a wet-cold winter operational and
equipment trial.
2 (a) Date: Feb 1945 - Apr 45
(b) Area: CARIBOU and COASTAL RANGE OF BRITISH
COLUMBIA
(c) Troops Participating: The following troops participated -
24 Fd Rgt RCA
26 Fd Coy RCE
6th Cdn Div Sigs
31 Alberta Recce Reg
1 Bn PA Vol
28 Tpt Coy RCASC
29 Coy RCASC
No 1 Pack Tp Tpt RCASC
25 Fd Amb RCAMC
13 Beach Det RCOC
Pacific Command Coy RCEME
102nd LAD RCEME
96th LAD RCEME
45 Coy CDC
No 10 Coy C Pro C
10 Area Sigs Coy
(d) RCAF participation on Exercise “POLAR BEAR” consisted of
transport support and tactical support.
11
(e) Aim: The aims of the exercise were laid down as follows:
(i) Mobility or extent to which a force could operate beyond base
or railhead, and nature of maintenance echelons required to
support progressive extension of operations beyond base or
railhead.
(ii) Most effective scales and types of standard or special transport
and equipment required.
(iii) Movement of troops, heavy equipment and supplies,
concealment and camouflage from air and ground, and
engineering problems.
(iv) Conditions affecting supplementary supply by air in
conjunction with ground supply echelons, and other conditions
of air/ground co-operation and communications.
(v) Study of the variations from the accepted tactical doctrine,
which will be imposed by winter conditions of snow and
extreme cold.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Careful preparation of organizational load tables is essential. Actual tests of all
these in training are also a requirement.
4 Careful prior planning between Repair and Spare Parts personnel is essential to
proper functioning of repair and recovery services, which should be co-ordinated by a
staff officer (EME) at Force Headquarters.
5 While certain information concerning the system to be used and the level of
supply to be established was available, it is of utmost importance that such
information be accurate, more detailed and available from the start to all concerned.
It was also shown to be essential that the system be tested in detail prior to the actual
operation.
12
6 Organization
Requirement for an enemy force on such an exercise is clearly indicated for the
creation of a reasonable tactical background.
7 Existing brigade and battalion organizations, with minor modifications, should be
retained for winter operations.
8 An increase of 100% in stretcher bearers is suggested for winter operations in
difficult terrain since rapid evacuation, so much more important under severe
conditions of weather, is essential.
9 Importance of well-organized auxiliary services is stressed for winter operations
due to the increased rigors. While energetic and worthwhile work was done in this
regard the benefit to be derived from more careful planning was clearly evident.
10 Scale of issue of axes, hand, as an item of personal equipment should be one axe
per two men, this axe to be of the Hudson Bay type, 2 to 2½ pound head with 30
inch handle.
11 Transport Support
Air supply is a most efficient means of supplying a force of this type, particularly
in areas not accessible to wheeled and tracked vehicles.
12 Evacuation of casualties is a practicable operation with Norseman aircraft under
the conditions encountered.
13 Fire Support
Effectiveness of mortar and artillery fire is considerably reduced by the smothering
effect of deep snow. Further research on this point is recommended.
14 Accepted methods of tactical employment and deployment of artillery appear
suitable for such operations. An oversnow vehicle suitable for moving guns and
transporting personnel is, however, an added requirement for maintenance of
mobility. Where use of vehicles is not practicable, Pack Artillery appears to be the
best solution.
13
15 Engineer Support
Tactical employment of engineers will be modified only in emphasis in winter
under such conditions since all movement becomes canalized into valleys, passes,
roads and trails. Hence, the emphasis will be placed on road construction and
maintenance, fixed bridging and demolitions.
16 Reconnaissance
Restriction of activity to main roads resulted in chief reconnaissance tasks being
advance route reconnaissance and limited cursory search of side roads and trails with
close search being ordered at some phases.
17 Mobility
Pack transport units are almost indispensable once a force moves beyond vehicle
head in terrain such as the Western Coastal region. Even should weather and a
change in the situation not interfere with air supply, pack animals are required to
move the force tactically and to transport supplies and equipment on the ground.
18 Organic animal units such as Horse Calvary and Pack Artillery would be more
efficient than motorized and dismounted units moved by pack transport units. If use
of the latter is necessitated, however, careful planning, co-operation, discipline and
proper pack equipment are essential.
19 Pack animals within the signals organization are as important when movement is
by animal transport as are vehicles when moving by motor.
20 Movement
Movement of a force operating in deep snow in bush country is canalized to roads
and trails.
21 It was found necessary to restrict traffic to the hours when the road was frozen in
order to preserve its surface. Movement along a single axis may be stopped
completely if this precautionary step is not taken at the earliest possible time after first
thaw.
22 Under “break-up” conditions of spring, 4 wheeled vehicles operated with great
difficulty. Restriction of travel to the hours between 0100 and 1000 hours daily was
necessary to enable such vehicles to continue operation. 6-wheeled 4 x 4 and 10-
14
wheeled 6 x 6’s are suggested for the heavier cargo classes. In any case dual rear
wheels are strongly recommended on all wheeled vehicles to be used in winter.
23 Assault Tactics
Tactics to be used are similar to jungle and mountain warfare tactics, with
consideration of the added feature of snow.
24 Night operations are practicable under these conditions and thorough training
therein is a necessity.
25 Although security measures in general are similar to those employed in any
operation, noise and track discipline should receive added emphasis.
26 Slower rate of movement imposed by snow and rough terrain will necessitate
modification of present concepts of supporting fire and assault distances.
27 Patrols
Limited visibilities in wooded country indicates the need of more extensive
patrolling of a very high standard.
28 Ground Battle
Tactical employment of medical units does not differ from methods used
generally.
29 Defence
All round defence of an area is a special problem in deep snow because of the
difficulty of moving off roads.
30 Since lines of communication are so much more difficult to establish and
maintain, and their disruption has so much more serious consequences under such
conditions, it is likely they will be primary enemy objectives in winter warfare.
31 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
Open fires are to be severely restricted since their smoke, flame and resultant scar
create an unmistakable signature.
15
32 Communications
Standard methods of ground/air communication are considered satisfactory.
33 The limited signals facilities on this exercise indicated strongly that under such
shortage not only may staff officers reach erroneous conclusions as to the actual
capacity of available means of communication, but in fact, grave incidents may well
result. It is suggested that a minimum requirement is three wireless nets and one line
for a brigade group on such operations.
34 It is worthy of comment that the best all-round set for performance was the
RCAF PN-1A. It is felt that there exists a requirement for a light man-pack set with
range comparable to that of Canadian No. 19 set and weight not in excess of 30
pounds.
35 Medical
Best means of evacuating casualties were the snowboat (Akja) and the cargo
carrier US M 29 (Weasel) with US M 19 trailer. For long distances aircraft provided
the best method.
36 Diseases or injuries peculiar to conditions of terrain and weather experienced
present no difficult problems in prevention or treatment.
37 Aid men should be with or immediately behind the troops.
38 Even under such rigorous conditions Nursing Sisters suffer no undue
inconvenience or loss of privacy and are an asset to the medical organization.
39 Early evacuation of casualties is of even greater importance under winter
conditions and is hampered by snow and difficult terrain.
40 Casualty Collecting Posts may have to b established beyond wheeled transport
and several collecting posts or warm-up stations may be necessary along the line of
evacuation.
41 Since narrow trails may well be the only means of access to the operational force,
the Field Ambulance must be prepared to handle the majority of surgical cases.
16
42 Selection and Training of Personnel
For infantry, the exercise re-emphasized principles found in all the basic field
manuals. All personnel must be trained in the use of snowshoes and an organic unit
of approximately one-third the strength of the infantry component is suggested for
special training on skis.
43 If the force has previously completed its basic and advanced training, a training
period of three months is adequate. This must include training in bushcraft, living in
the cold, and a method of travel over deep snow - either on skis or snowshoes.
Hardening training for such operation must run concurrently with other special work
required.
44 Man-management and interior economy become increasingly important in winter
because of:
(a) The more rigorous living conditions.
(b) The much more serious results to be expected from neglect.
45 “Drills” for establishing and breaking camp, moving by transport, etc., are of even
greater importance in winter operations than at other times, since sudden falls of
snow or drops in temperature may have much more serious consequences.
46 An extremely high level of vehicle maintenance is demanded in winter operations,
since not only weather, but road conditions will invariably impose greater strain on
all equipment and personnel.
47 A proportion of fitters must receive special training in the repair of oversnow
vehicles which are not standard issue.
48 Increased individual hazards of winter warfare over and above those imposed by
combat demand even more extensive first aid training than usual. In addition to
training in basic winter warfare as carried out by other troops, medical personnel
require technical training in casualty evacuation, care of casualties, erection of
hospitals and sanitation, as they relate to cold weather and difficult terrain.
49 Conditioning of all troops, including medical personnel, to exposure and exercise
must be gradual and continuous, up to the standard required for the operation.
17
50 A syllabus of training for medical personnel is presented, with recommendations
for modifications to the usual medical organization (See Exercise “POLAR BEAR”
Report).
51 A party of well-trained demolition engineers should be available to go on long
range patrols with specialized mountain infantry. In addition, one section should be
specially trained and equipped for mountain engineering and rigging to assist in
placement of cableways, recovery of vehicles, and in demolitions, and to assist surprise
operations over difficult country by any of the combat arms.
52 Administration
Three types of ration were used. The Winter Field Service Ration, in bulk,
presented problems in break-down, packaging and cooking for small sub-units and
groups.
53 Of the two pack rations the Canadian Arctic Monopack was generally well-liked
and considered much superior to the Canadian Mess Tin Ration.
54 Dental detachments could operate well forward under all conditions experienced
by fighting troops in winter operations. They are very small detachments, and should
be attached to some other sub-unit for administration.
55 A mobile dental lorry can operate in any location where vehicles of its type can
move. Where movement off roads is anticipated, dentals will require an oversnow
vehicle. When moves are made without vehicles, dental detachments should have
pack animals and packers attached permanently.
56 A problem worthy of operational research is the comparison of surfaced maps,
British tank maps, US maps and canvas-backed maps, in order to incorporate all
desirable features.
57 Laundry facilities should be carefully considered in planning for such operations,
and the laundry equipment should be set up as close to the using troops as
practicable, not necessarily at base.
58 Drying facilities, particularly for such items as bedrolls, the insulating qualities of
which are markedly reduced by dampness in the filling, must receive careful
attention. This problem may even necessitate erection of special drying tents or
shelters since it is unlikely that the use of open fires in an actual operation would ever
be allowable to the extent used on this exercise.
18
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
59 New Developments Required
Standard Canadian web equipment is not satisfactory for use with special winter
clothing. An assault jerkin is suggested.
60 It is thought that any oversnow vehicle should be so designed as to accommodate
the load within the vehicle itself without use of sledges or trailers. If trailers must be
used, than a tracked trailer is indicated.
61 Seating design and comfort should be considered more carefully in vehicles to be
used in winter operations because of increased importance of driver fatigue under
more rigorous conditions.
62 With reference to the tracked oversnow vehicles used (US M 29, M7, and the
Canadian Snowmobile), a combination of features of the US M 29 and the Canadian
Snowmobile Mk I seems to be the ideal. For all three, operation in deep snow was
difficult. The M 7 Snow Tractor (US) is too fragile and not suitable for this type of
operation.
63 Shelters suitable for repair work must be provided. Improvised shelters may be
used but consume time which should properly be devoted to repair tasks.
64 A track-laying vehicle for recovery of oversnow vehicles is required, in the same
proportion as medium break-down lorries.
65 A need exists for an organizational tentage unit of the wall-tent type
approximately 8 x 14 feet for use as office, stores, etc.
66 A small collapsible wood-burning stove should be developed for use in marquees
and 6-man tents by static or semi-static units.
67 A hot-air heater of the Stewart-Warner ground heater type is best suited for
heating hospital, surgical and ward tents.
68 Absence of any volume of casualties, real or simulated, prevents conclusive
observations as to suitability of scales of issue. However, it is felt that standard
medical equipment is suitable but must be supplemented by casualty shelters, winter
evacuation equipment, sleeping bags for casualties, and heating equipment.
evacuation equipment, sleeping bags for casualties, and heating equipment.