GENERAL
1 This was a two-sided exercise carried out to investigate the tactical techniques and
logistic requirements of an infantry platoon operating overland against an enemy of
one infantry section which had been landed for reconnaissance purposes.
101
2 (a) Date: 19 Aug - 1 Sep 1951
(b) Area: CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:
 (i) Own Troops
 1 Pl R 22e R
 6 RC Sigs personnel
 1 RCAMC medical orderly
(ii) Enemy Troops
 1 Sec R 22e R
 6 RC Sigs personnel
 1 RCAMC medical orderly
(d) Observers and umpires were from UKALS, DRB, and Training Wing, Fort
Churchill.
(e) RCAF: 2 Norseman aircraft of the RCAF (JSES) Unit. (One aircraft
equipped with wheels was used for administrative details only.
Float equipped aircraft was used in the tactical and emergency
role.)
(f) Aim: The aim of the exercise as laid down by the Directorate of Military
Training was to:
(i) Practice sub-units of 1 R 22e R in a tactical role.
(ii) Establish firm scales of clothing, arms, ammunition and
personal and unit equipment for employment of forces at
the platoon level operating over diversified terrain during
the Arctic summer.
(iii) Test infantry platoon tactical techniques now in effect and
to recommend where necessary, their modification to suit
Arctic conditions.
102
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
A large part of the training carried out in Churchill, as has been previously stated,
is designed to dispel the fears of the Arctic and the troops involved. This is only
possible if the conditions such as are found far from human habitation can be
duplicated. It is recommended therefore that if possible all future exercises should
take place in areas far enough away from Churchill to approximate the desirable
conditions.
4 Command and Control
In both wooded and barren areas the normal drills for laying out a platoon
bivouac apply. As in other regions, each individual situation must be considered on
its own merits and modified from the drill accordingly.
5 Transport Support
It is considered that RCAF participation in all exercises in the north is essential
but on a larger scale than is normally considered in the meaning of the word
emergency. This participation should include:
(a) Normal supply to ground forces.
(b) With the present limitations of ground wireless equipment the
establishment of wireless communications with the main base at
predetermined intervals.
(c) At present, conventional aircraft cannot be relied upon in casualty
evacuation, due to the limitation of landing areas. It is considered
that helicopters could best fulfill this requirement.
(d) Helicopters could also be used on special tasks as route
reconnaissance, aerial reconnaissance, to locate the enemy and
direct support of army component operations.
(e) Gliders could also be used.
103
6 Fire Support
It is considered that a light semi-automatic weapon, preferably of the present
British pattern, is most desirable weapon to be carried. The weight of the Bren gun
and the weight of the ammunition required to make it effective would have to
increase the individual man’s load over the optimum considered desirable.
7 The Sten Machine Carbine, plus ninety rounds of ammunition, can be carried
within the optimum load requirement.
8 Platoon weapons and ammunition, due to the weight factor, can not be carried.
It is considered, however, that the use of these weapons is desirable and that they
should be air-dropped prior to the action taking place.
9 Logistics
It is considered that 45-50 lbs is the optimum load carried by the individual
soldier over diversified terrain. It was noted that during this exercise there was a
marked drop in distance covered, rate of march, fitness to fight and morale, when
weights above 50 lbs were carried.
10 Reconnaissance
It is evident that very little reliance can be placed on visual air reconnaissance
from Norseman type aircraft in locating troops on the ground. The clothing worn by
the troops blended with the texture of the ground and provided troops remained still,
they were almost invisible.
11 Assault Tactics
The most suitable method of advance in both barren and wooded areas when
enemy is unlikely is in single file. It must be appreciated, however, that these tracks
can readily be seen from the air in the barren lands and open bush. The force
commander must therefore maintain security and deception by frequently breaking
track. Where contact is imminent, advance should be made in extended order in the
barrens, and single file in wooded areas.
12 Defence
On operations of this scale, due to the rough nature of the terrain, defensive
positions are not difficult to find. On larger scale operations, however, difficulty 
104
would be found in placing sub-units in mutual support for some or all of the
following reasons:
(a) Lack of sufficient areas of dry ground.
(b) Necessity of building up positions of sod. A solid sod wall 9′
thick is considered the minimum width of safety against small
arms fire.
(c) As large areas of sod would be removed, camouflage due to the
scars left in the ground would be extremely difficult. In this area
it is possible to dig only a depth of one foot. At this depth the
permafrost table is encountered and further digging is impossible.
13 Navigation
The following aids to navigation are required:
(a) Oil bearing prismatic compass, one per section.
(b) Service protractor, one per section.
(c) Pace counter, one per section.
14 It is considered that maps on a smaller scale than 1” to the mile must be
augmented by air photographs. The scale of issue of these photographs would
depend to a large extent on the nature of the operation, but could generally be
considered to be one set per section.
15 A Sun Compass is required as a check on the magnetic compass in areas in
proximity to the magnetic pole or where large local areas of variation are suspected.
The Chichester sun compass appears to be satisfactory and should be provided on the
scale of one per oil hearing prismatic compass.
16 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
Local materials combined with X-51 clothing provide good camouflage. No
extras are needed for operations of this scale.
17 There are no special camouflage problems in a bivouac area.
105
18 The clothing and equipment worn by the troops blended well into the local
terrain, and no camouflage problems arose other than those when defensive works
were required. Concealment from the air was naturally simple provided the troops
remained still. Concealment from ground observation however depended on the
methods of movement employed by the commander. These are not different to those
precautions necessary in other areas.
19 Communications
It is considered, due to the lack of mobility, that a supporting umpire signals net
is required. This signals net should extent down as far as one wireless set per umpire.
20 The W/S No 62 was too heavy to be carried beyond D/2 and as this set was the
main communication link with Fort Churchill, communications had to be carried
out by either orbiting aircraft or when possible and available, a No 29 set from a
Penguin. This W/S No 29 could not be relied upon. The W/S No 58 in the aircraft
worked extremely well. Excellent communications were established by using this set
to contact the ground troops and using the normal aircraft set to communicate back
to base.
21 Selection and Training of Personnel
No group of specially trained men is required to operate in this type of terrain
during the Arctic summer, however, it is preferable that all troops undergo a short
indoctrination course, mostly to dispel preconcerned misconceptions.
22 Administration
When the Canadian 5-in-1 ration pack is used, no additional cooking equipment
is required beyond the service mess tin.
23 During summer, tentage can be dispensed with.
24 In this area, local fuel can be relied upon. Heating tablets issued one per day per
man are desirable but not essential.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
25 Equipment Satisfactory
The X-51 pattern anti-contact glove is satisfactory.
106
26 The Canadian shoepack, rubber bottom, leather top, is the best type of footgear
at present available, due mainly to its capabilities of wear during a wider variety of
seasons.
27 The nylon X-51 clothing adapted for summer use is the most desirable due to its
quick drying capabilities.
28 Web equipment was not found satisfactory, but the rucksack was found most
desirable for fighting troops.
29 It is considered that the packboard is required for specialized use, eg, ammunition
carrying parties, demolition parties, wiring parties and possibly certain other carrying
parties such as infantry support weapons, wireless sets, etc, over short distances.
30 Modification to Existing Equipment
It is recommended that investigations continue on the provision of a wireless set
capable of being man-packed and with an operating range of 50 miles, and that this
wireless set, or portions thereof, when loaded in conjunction with the personal gear
and equipment of the signaler should not exceed the optimum load of 50 pounds.
31 It is recommended that consideration be given to modifying the X-51 jackets to
include a skirt in which two large side pockets could be provided. In addition, as is
the case in the British combat jacket a useful pocket for carrying the poncho or other
small soft items could be made in the skirt.
32 The headnet is required and the present head net is satisfactory if the colour is
changed to Olive Drab No 7. An additional desirable modification would be the
inclusion of a wire ring at nose level which would allow the head net to stand out well
from the face.