GENERAL
1 During the winter 1951-52 reinforced company groups of the Mobile Striking
Force (MSF) were rotated through Fort Churchill for a four week period of intensive 
107
Arctic training under the direction of the Commandant, Fort Churchill. The training
schedule for each company group was as follows:
(a) Indoctrination training 7 days
(b) Exercise “POLESTAR” 17 days
(c) Staging in and out of Fort Churchill 4 days
2 (a) Dates: Group One - 18 Nov to 16 Dec 51
 Group Two - 13 Jan to 10 Feb 52
 Group Three - 17 Feb to 16 Mar 52
(b) Area: CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:
 Friendly Force Enemy Force
 Group One
 Coy Gp 1 R 22e R P1, 1 RCR
 4.2-in Mor Sec, Det 23 Fd Sqn
 1 Lt Bty (Para)
 Det 23 Fd Sqn
 Det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn
 Det 23 Tpt Coy
 Det 37 Fd Amb
 Group Two
 Inf Coy Gp, 1 RCR P1, 1 RCR, as
 Two 4.2-in Mor Secs, required from Friendly
 1 Lt Bty (Para) Force.
 Det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn
 Det 23 Tpt Coy
 Det 37 Fd Amb
 Group Three
Inf Coy Gp, 1 PPCLI P1, 1 PPCLI, as
Two 4.2-in Mor Secs, required from Friendly
 1 Lt Bty (Para) Force.
Det AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn
108
Det 23 Tpt Coy
Det 37 Fd Amb
(d) Air supply was limited to two RCAF Norseman aircraft.
(e) Aim: The aim of the training programme was to:
(i) Exercise components of the MSF in dismounted oversnow
movement in the Arctic under operational conditions.
(ii) Exercise infantry companies of MSF battalions operating with
the minimum support of other arms and services, in three
phases of war, ie, attack, withdrawal, and defence.
(iii) Test the tactical techniques now in effect and recommend,
where necessary, their modification to meet Arctic conditions.
(iv) Re-assess the requirements for the basic minimum logistical
support for such a force by reducing weight, bulk, and the
number of items used in northern operations.
(v) Assess user reactions to operational arctic equipment.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
Ground operations should commence from a point where supplies can be landed
and from which casualties can be evacuated. This air head should be approximately
5-10 miles from the enemy lodgement so as to be out of range of enemy ground
weapons.
4 Organization
It is recommended that no change be made to the section and platoon
organization. In the company organization, however, there are many who will not be
required, eg, RCASC cooks, company drivers, possibly the pioneer section, etc.
These men must be considered only on their individual merits as soldiers, porters, etc,
and within the availability of aircraft which is normally at a premium. The decision
as to who will be required must generally be left to the company commander, and
may be greatly affected by the specific operation being undertaken.
109
5 Command and Control
While march discipline was good and morale high, there was a decided tendency
to gather too close together during the night halt. It is considered that tent groups
must not be closely concentrated, and that a distance of approximately 40 to 50 yds
between sections must be accepted.
6 Fire Support
The 4.2-in mortars of the Lt Bty were unable to continue with the company
group. However, it was possible for the company 3-in mortar and MMGs to move
with the group. No particular delay was imposed upon the company by the inclusion
of these weapons, even though they carried with them their first line ammunition.
7 Little field firing was conducted, and in most cases firing was limited to blank
ammunition. However, little difficulty was experienced with small arms provided
they were properly arcticized. Emergency rifles taken into tents should be kept at
ground level. The only major problems encountered were as follows:
(a) 3-in Mortars
There was considerable loss of range during fire power
demonstrations when these weapons were used. With charge 2,
the sights were set for 2800 yds, and the bombs fell approximately
1000 yds short. The reason for this is not positively known, but
three possibilities are offered:
(i) The fact that sand filled bombs were used.
(ii) That the temperature at the time of firing was minus 20° F.
This may have had an adverse affect on the propellent charge.
(iii) The propellent charge was of old stock.
(b) Medium Machine Gun - Vickers
First position stoppages occurred with considerable frequency
until such time as the coolant became sufficiently heated. When
this had been attained through fire or pre-heating, no particular
difficulties were experienced with the operation of the gun. There
appeared, however, to be a loss of range.
110
8 Logistics
The number of days which a reinforced company group can move unsupported is
limited by the amount of rations and fuel which can be carried by the group.
Normally, 3 days’ supplies are carried. By conservation, these may be made to suffice
for 4 days.
9 The average weight of rations consumed was approximately 4 lbs per man per
day.
10 Reconnaissance
Although visibility is generally good in the Arctic, detailed reconnaissance is still
necessary prior to putting in an attack, and unless such reconnaissance is made, there
is a strong likelihood that troops may be committed either in the wrong direction, or
against the wrong objective.
11 Mobility
Due to the difficulties of movement, commanders at all levels must appreciate the
increased time required to carry out ground operations.
12 An average mileage of 8 miles per day can be attained by a reinforced company
group, provided weather conditions are not severe enough to hamper movement.
This does not include the movement of 4.2-in mortars or their ammunition, which
are only capable of being moved over extremely short distances, ie, approximately one
mile.
13 It is considered that a load not in excess of 50 lbs can be carried in the rucksack, if
travelling is unusually difficult, 35 lbs is the optimum.
14 Movement
It is not considered that any special devices are required for trail marking. Snow
cairns can easily be built in the barrens, and trails can be blazed in the wooded areas.
However, this does not eliminate the possible requirement for marking devices such
as sea dye, etc, for marking cut start lines or other tactical formation lines in the
barrens. Many of these must be visible at night.
15 Assault Tactics
111
The night attack is possible and offers many advantages over the daylight attack.
The airdrop can only achieve momentary surprise. Tactical surprise must be
obtained by normal ground methods, ie, the night attack, the direction of the attack,
the scale of the attack, etc.
16 Complicated tactics have no more likelihood of succeeding in the north than in
any other area. Assault plans must be simple, and the rules which apply in normal
climates and terrain must be followed with even greater detail.
17 Care must be exercised in crossing open spaces, and it may be necessary for the
commander to decide to send troops around open spaces rather than across them.
18 The only bearing the Arctic environment has on this problem is that of storms
and blowing snow. During such conditions, the troops must maintain the same
formations as those that are used during night approach marches. If these conditions
should be severe, however, it is questionable whether an approach march is feasible.
19 Patrols
In crossing country within the tree line, patrols without radio communication to
the main group can easily be ambushed or lost. Therefore, patrols should not move
beyond the range of immediate assistance from the main body.
20 Navigation
Distance judging is most difficult in Arctic areas beyond the tree line or within
the transition zone. Those distinguishing features which give the observer an
indication of his distance from a specified object in other areas are either not present,
or are dwarfed to such a degree that in nearly all cases, distance will be overestimated.
21 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
No specific arrangements or materials are necessary for camouflage in wooded
areas. Present clothing and equipment are adequate.
22 In barren areas, the camouflage of tentage, clothing and equipment is necessary.
23 Communications
The No 58 set could not be depended upon for company to platoon
communications. During the second exercise, a wireless set No 62 was used for the 
112
main communications back to base, and the No 88 set from company to platoons.
Neither of these sets functioned satisfactorily. It was impossible to keep the No 88
set batteries warm, therefore the sets soon went dead.
24 Medical
It is considered that the RAP should remain with the administrative group and
avoid the strong tendency for medical units to approach too closely to the operation
in hand.
25 Living conditions in a 5-man tent favour the spread of upper respiratory
infection. There were a number of soldiers reporting each day with minor colds and
coughs.
26 Any ointment with a paraffin or lanolin base was useless, in that it solidified, but
some measure of success was obtained by taking an ointment which had a glycerin
base.
27 The ordinary morphine syrette can only be used if it is carried in a shirt pocket
next to the skin. Glass containers will not be broken by freezing, provided that an
airspace of a third the contained volume remains, and that the glass is not too thin.
28 Selection and Training of Personnel
Strict attention must be paid by all ranks to the increased necessity for care of
arms.
29 A high standard of leadership is required in order to maintain morale and
discipline. This is particularly true for junior leaders.
30 In order to carry out operations without an indoctrination phase on the care and
use of Arctic equipment, teaching in the use of tentage, lamps, cookers, and such
equipment must be carried out in the yearly training syllabus. Training in these
subjects need not be done in Arctic areas, nor under winter conditions.
31 All troops participating in northern training should have attained corps training
standards prior to proceeding on an exercise.
32 It was evident throughout the exercises that the troops had not been trained to
maintain their equipment, a situation that might well result in casualties, or even the
failure of an exercise or operation.
113
33 Clothing should be carefully fitted, and the minimum clothing requirements
should b clearly known by all ranks.
34 Good march discipline is necessary to obviate fatigue and exhaustion.
35 Night training in northern conditions cannot be over emphasized. Every effort
should be made to include as much night training as possible during the basic and
indoctrination training, mainly for speed and the elimination of noise. The use of
lights must be avoided.
36 More practice is required in marching and hauling, and rucksacks should be worn
frequently during indoctrination training. Pt and hardening exercises should be
included.
37 It is important that participating troops “marry up” for group training prior to
the exercise. Team work between all arms is essential.
38 A one week period of environmental indoctrination should be conducted in the
exercise area.
39 Administration
The wastage in Arctic clothing and equipment during extended exercises is
considerable. Adequate stocks for replacement of these items must be maintained at
the exercise base. Wastage can be reduced by proper maintenance.
40 Arctic clothing and equipment should be held by units of the MSF, and not
issued just prior to departure on an exercise or operation.
41 It became fully evident by the end of these exercises that the maximum load
carrying and pull capacity was 150 lbs per man, if the man was to be fit to fight at the
end of the march.
42 The toboggan dumping point will normally become the area in which the
administrative group is established.
43 The weight of rations now being carried appears to be excessive and capable of
reduction.
44 It was recommended by the medical officers attending these exercises, that rum
ration should be provided for nightly issue to all troops.
114
45 The OC exercise group should have authority to issue, on medical advice, an extra
meal when it is warranted.
46 Opportunity should be taken to chew a cookie or candies from the day’s rations at
some of the halts.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
47 Modification to Existing Equipment
The two-man fibre glass toboggan was unsatisfactory as it wore out very quickly.
Magnesium two-man toboggans were satisfactory.
48 The ten-man British tent, in its design characteristics, proved successful for use by
company HQ and the medical section.
49 It is considered that breech and muzzle covers would have been useful as a
protection against snow and ice crystals. The present breech cover was inadequate.
The following suggestions for improvement were made:
(a) a light nylon cover capable of being removed by zipper.
(b) an elastic type sleeve capable of being pulled back over the
mechanism to the small of the butt.
50 No trigger mechanisms were available for testing on these exercises. It was agreed
that difficulty was experienced in firing weapons. Some of the suggestions were:
(a) use of a trigger mechanism.
(b) enlargement of trigger guard to allow the insertion of a trigger
finger mitt.
(c) a more adequate anti-contact glove.
51 The [consensus] of opinion of all company groups was that a light automatic
weapon was required. The British EM 2 rifle seems to fulfill the requirement.
52 The shovel, snow, Arctic, did not prove of value. Almost all of those in use were
broken within three days. A more durable design is required. Shovels, miner, and 
115
snow saws, should be issued on the scale of two per tent group. The present scale of
one snow knife per tent group is adequate.
53 It was suggested that the present type of Coleman stove is inadequate. Not only
were the wastage figures on these stoves high, but great difficulty was experienced in
lighting them under conditions of cold, due to the fact that they function on the
generator principle. Research is required to provide a suitable, light, efficient stove
for northern operations.
54 The Coleman lamp, particularly the 500 candle power variety, is too large for use
in a five-man tent. It is considered that investigation should be initiated with a view
to producing a lamp of lesser candlepower, more rugged construction, and smaller
size.
55 At low temperatures, the arms and eyepieces of the goggles, brow rest, became
brittle and broke. Wastage figures were high. It is considered that these goggles were
too fragile and that a more suitable type goggle should be provided.
56 A requirement exists for an expendable patrol container. The present two gallon
container is expensive, liable to damage, and the tops are easily lost.
57 All company groups agreed that the thermos container was not satisfactory.
Consideration should be given to the provision of:
(a) a larger thermos to be issued as tent group equipment, rather than
as an individual item.
(b) a limited number of a more suitable type of small thermos, for use
by individuals on patrol and sentry duty.
58 In many cases punctures occurred in the pads, inflatable. The air escaped through
leaking seams or by the cork tearing away from its rubber loop. These pads should be
checked on issue for possible leaks and irregularities of manufacture, and a puncture
repair outfit should be provided on the scale of one per company group.
59 New Developments Required
It is strongly recommended that No. 88 sets should not be used on future
northern operations until a cold weather battery has been developed.
116
60 Pack boards were not used on the exercise, but it is considered that a limited
requirement exists for this type of equipment, particularly in handling the loads of
supporting arms which may be dropped after the main body.
61 The principle of radically reducing weight should be constantly under review.
The following are notations made on personal equipment:
(a) Towel - should not be carried. Paper towels are provided in ration
packs.
(b) Tooth brush - this should be taken, but not paste. The latter
freezes. Dental advice is that salt provided in the ration pack is
equally as good, if not preferable, to many pastes.
(c) Soap - is not necessary, as it is provided in the 5-in-1 pack.
(d) Powder - is essential, and should be provided in small, light, noncrushable
containers. It is useful in maintaining hygiene of the
feet, crotch, arm pits, and body surfaces. It prevents excessive
sweating of the feet when liberally dusted into socks, and limits
blistering. It can relieve blistering when present, if dusted into
gloves it facilitates the slipping on and off of gloves in extreme
cold.
(e) Knife, Fork, Spoon and Mess Tin - should not be taken. The
ration pack is self-sufficient.
(f) Mug - is necessary.
62 With communal equipment, weight reduction is also important:
(a) Tent and Toboggan Repair Kit (15 lbs) - this weight was pulled by
some teams, and is out of proportion to its usefulness. Only light
tools and bare essentials are required, carried on a scale of one per
company.
(b) Axe - is heavy, but is necessary for falling trees.
(c) Kettle (2 lb 5 oz) – was used by some troops. A thin aluminum
kettle would be preferable.
(d) Tea Pots – were taken by some groups. They are not needed. Tea
can be made in the individual’s mug from tea-bags provided.
63 The parka should be produced with varying sleeve lengths to fit varying lengths of
upper limbs. The parka hood should be fur trimmed, the metal ends of hood cords
should be replaced or removed. Parka pockets should be reinforced, and parka cuffs
should not be held in by elastic.
64 A gauntlet on the outer mitts should be produced.
117
65 Trousers camouflage should be made looser.
66 The peaked cap prevents closure of the parka hood over one’s face during severe
wind chills and the balaclava is then recommended under these conditions.
67 The housewife should be taken to repair clothing.
68 Tests should be made on tentage camouflage on the barrens.