GENERAL
1 This was a non-tactical exercise carried out in two phases with an intervening day
for refitting of equipment at Fort Churchill.
2 (a) Date: 20 Jul - 2 Aug 1950
(b) Area: CAPE CHURCHILL and DUCK LAKE
(c) Troops Participating:
One officer and ten other ranks of the Royal Canadian
Regiment.
(d) Observers: Five officers representing Directorate of Military Training,
Directorate of Inter-service Development, Defence
Research Board, and the British Army.
(e) RCAF: One Canso (Phase II)
Norseman from JSES Unit (Phase I & II)
83
(f) Aim: The aim of the exercise as laid down by the Directorate of Military
Training, was as follows:
(i) Investigate the tactical movement of an infantry section in the
reconnaissance role.
(ii) Determine the clothing and equipment requirements of an infantry
section operating for a period of two weeks.
(iii) Conduct engineering trials on certain items of clothing and
equipment.
(iv) In addition to the above, observers took the opportunity insofar as
the scope of the exercise permitted, to evaluate the problems of
northern summer operations.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
The environmental conditions encountered presented few problems in the
conduct of small scale operations beyond those inherent to any undeveloped region
arising from the great distances, lack of all forms of developed communications and
the difficulty of their provision. These would necessitate reliance to a great extent
upon air transport and supply. In turn it will be of importance to reduce the weight,
bulk and quantity of equipment and stores of all kinds by design, by hard living and
by the elimination of the non-essential.
4 Transport Support
A light aircraft, preferably a helicopter, working integrally with the ground troops
would materially increase their effectiveness. Its primary purpose would be to act as
the eyes for the ground force for route finding and distant reconnaissance. Other
uses would be for wireless communication with base, for the rapid transport over
short (in terms of movement by air) distances of small groups of men, small
quantities of stores, and for forward casualty evacuation.
5 Neither the Norseman nor Canso aircraft were entirely suitable in their role on
the exercise. The major disadvantage of the first in its limited payload (375 lbs) with
full fuel load and survival equipment), and of the second the restrictions on the water
bodies suitable for landing. Both problems might be overcome by employment of 
84
gliders. It appeared probable that landing zones on the tundra could be selected
without difficulty wherever required, although this requires confirmation by experts
to ensure both landing and snatching are feasible without damage.
6 The construction of operational airstrips, given gliders suitable for the transport of
plant, appears feasible. Large gravel deposits exist throughout the area. Level runway
sites can be found in the vicinity of many.
7 It is recommended that the feasibility of employing gliders be the subject of expert
investigation.
8 Logistics
Range is limited by the weight and bulk of rations which can be carried by the
individual in addition to his operational scale of arms and equipment. Using the US
Arctic Trail ration (AT 1) a range of three days was practical and five days possible
and feasible by going on to half rations.
9 Reconnaissance
It would be of value in future exercises if a light aircraft could be made available
for tactical employment and reconnaissance in conjunction with ground troops.
10 Mobility
The uneven hummocky moss and marsh slow down the rate of marching. For fit
troops 1½ mph is normal. In a day 10 map miles may be expected on the average, 15
- 20 for a forced march.
11 Water transport (canoe or other means) suffers from several disadvantages. The
major objection to its tactical use is in the difficulty both of obtaining surprise and of
guarding against it. Freedom of action is restricted by the necessity to follow the
water-way. Movement upstream would usually be slow and difficult. Consequently
the use of canoes by a section in a reconnaissance role, air landed in proximity to the
enemy as envisaged in the exercise, would rarely be warranted. They might, in
favourable circumstances, be used for the transport of troops and supplies in a
support role. However, they are difficult to transport by air, relatively unstable, and
require considerable skill in their use. It is possible that more generally suitable craft
might be found from existing military patterns. A rough guide to canoe moves,
obviously widely variable with conditions of weather, wind, current, number of
rapids, is given below. Figures are for a 16 foot canoe carrying three men and their
equipment.
85
Item Miles in the hour Miles per day
On lakes 3 24
Rivers - upstream 5 40
Rivers - downstream 1 7-10
12 Movement
Movement on foot is possible without difficulty throughout the area. Most
swamps and sloughs can be waded. Those sections which cannot are easily by-passed.
Swamp shoes or other artificial aids to movement are necessary. The comparatively
few rivers or creeks which cannot be forded may be easily crossed by many
improvised methods - the inflatable mattress which is an item of individual
equipment is useful for this purpose.
13 Study of the country traversed and observation of oversnow vehicles and tractors
in the area FORT CHURCHILL - CAPE CHURCHILL suggest that the film and
report on CHURCHILL Vehicle Trials 1946 may have exaggerated the difficulties of
movement. While the use of wheeled transport cannot be envisaged it is considered
probable that standard tracked vehicles could move without great restriction in many
areas and that passable routes could be found over most. Conditions might
deteriorate appreciably later in the season as the permafrost table lowers.
14 Assault Tactics
Accepted tactical principles apply without change and operational techniques and
procedures call for little modification.
15 Navigation
The lack of accurate large scale maps makes accurate route finding and land
navigation most difficult. In coastal plain areas the difficulty is further increased by
the multitude of lakes and water ways, restricted observation and lack of visible or
charted land marks. Air mosaics would be of material assistance and are considered
requisite to successful operation where direct air reconnaissance for ground troops can
not be provided.
16 It is recommended that air mosaics of the exercise area be prepared and issued
prior to any future exercises so that the degree of assistance they afford in map
reading and route finding can be determined. They should, if possible, be gridded.
86
17 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
The olive drab provided for cold weather clothing and equipment is most suitable
for summer use. It should be extended to all items. Disruptive camouflage in
clothing and equipment is not required. It is of interest that landing counts of
mosquitos and flies were appreciably less on the Canadian experimental clothing of
olive drab nylon than on materials of different colour and texture.
18 For dismounted troops concealment is easily achieved. For vehicles it would be
more difficult, but no more so than in temperate theatres. While there would be
little difficulty in concealing vehicles in creek beds, willow or spruce clumps, tracks
remain clearly visible and track discipline is as important as elsewhere.
19 Communications
A problem was presented in providing communication between the
reconnaissance section and base. A possible solution with existing wireless equipment
is to establish a suitable high-powered rear link with relays of man-pack sets working
forward. Obvious disadvantages are the increased size of group required, complexity,
and added danger to security. A preferable alternative eliminating the necessity for
separate rear link and relay system is, as already mentioned, to employ a light aircraft
or helicopter as an integral part of the group.
20 It is understood a wireless set exists which is man-portable and of the same range
as the No 29. It is suggested this be investigated with a view to its provision in future
exercises. Such a set is required to provide communication between the
reconnaissance element and its advanced base if communication through an aircraft
in tactical support is not available.
21 Medical
No particular medical problems arose during the exercise. It is possible, however,
that over a longer period the incidence of respiratory diseases and foot casualties
might be greater than normal since wet feet must be accepted as routine and
immersion to the waist or higher of frequent occurrence.
22 Selection and Training of Personnel
Men classified medically fit for active service are acceptable for northern summer
operations. Special selection is not required.
87
23 Training, additional to normal corps training, is necessary in those subjects
classified under the general heading of bush or woodcraft. Two weeks is adequate for
individual training. An additional week or two weeks for sub-unit and unit training
might be necessary for operations on a larger scale. While it is not essential that such
training should be carried out in the north, it is desirable when possible in order that
preconceived misconceptions concerning the hardships and difficulties encountered
in the Arctic should be dispelled and the correct mental approach ensured prior to the
operation.
24 There is no doubt that the average individual has a mental picture of the Arctic
greatly exaggerating its difficulties and hazards. While the problems of summer are
not such as to demand special training in the north, it is recommended that summer
indoctrination courses at Fort Churchill be continued. The object in so doing would
be to build up a nucleus of officers and NCOs in all units able to disseminate
balanced and factual information on the Arctic and its problems and thus counteract
the exaggerated views so widely held. The same purpose would be achieved through
continued exercises.
25 Administration
A light weight trail ration is essential for operations of the nature envisaged during
the exercise. That tested, the US AT 1 experimental Arctic trail ration, while
basically satisfactory was considered to be too heavy, too bulky and lacking in
[palatability].
26 For operations of longer duration ration packs suitable for use in temperate
regions would be equally suitable for Arctic summer use. It is essential however that
they should be waterproof and desirable that they be floatable if wastage is to be kept
within reasonable limits.
27 In case of emergency small groups could usually live off the country although this
is not recommended as an administrative principle. A shot gun and fish net make the
task easier and form useful adjuncts to catering equipment when carrying capacity
permits.
28 The US 5-1 B Pack Ration is generally satisfactory except that the inner container
which holds the cigarettes, salt, sugar, etc, is not waterproof and that tea should be
provided.
29 For small operations of isolated groups up to platoon strength the provision of
stoves and fuel for cooking is unnecessary. For larger groups the gasoline stoves and
fuel as used for winter operations are required. Fuel expenditure approximates 1 
88
gallon weekly for each five man tent group when using the Coleman mountain type
stove.
30 All repellants used were satisfactory as was the spray for tent use. No appreciable
difference in the effectiveness of repellants was observed, although in some cases eye
and skin irritation was reported in minor degree. None were sufficiently factual to
warrant a firm recommendation and investigation under controlled conditions is
required.
31 No suitable 24 hr trail ration or 5 man pack ration is yet available. It is
recommended that an adequate trail and pack ration be made available as soon as
possible.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
32 Equipment satisfactory
With few exceptions suitable clothing either exists or requires only minor
modification to be quite acceptable.
33 The experimental insect-proof suits tested performed satisfactorily and a desirable
feature is the quick drying property of the nylon used. The screened vests were,
however, unnecessary and the type of combat clothing assembly as being developed
for use in all theatres by Great Britain and the United States would be equally
suitable, with minor modifications, for Arctic summer.
34 Personal and group equipment used on the exercise was generally suitable and
requires little modification. With few exceptions, equipment presently available as
normal issue, is considered acceptable for future summer operations.
35 The headnet X-50 is considered too heavy and bulky and is difficult to pack or
carry. It is recommended that issue headnet be retained and that no further
development of this item is necessary.
36 There is no requirement for an anti-insect glove. However, it is recommended
that the Gloves Anti-Contact K-50 be issued for wear on cold days, for cooking and
for handling cordage, etc.
37 Holders, candle, X-50 are considered satisfactory.
38 The machete US pattern is satisfactory.
89
39 Pads inflatable, X-50 are satisfactory and it is recommended they be adopted for
northern operations in summer.
40 Shirts flannel w/collar are satisfactory.
41 Socks, GS, are satisfactory.
42 Tents Arctic 5-man insect proof, without floor, are considered satisfactory.
43 Vests, string, nylon, are satisfactory.
44 Bags, sleeping X-50 w/liner, combined with the inner bag and cover is considered
satisfactory.
45 Insoles SARAN are recommended for summer use due to their quick drying
properties.
46 Tablets, water purifying, are considered satisfactory, because of the taste removing
tablets included.
47 Modification to Existing Equipment
It is recommended that the carrier be given further trial under typical Arctic
summer conditions. It is known that going can be found to immobilize it. The
object of the trials would be to determine to what extent the prevalence of such going
destroyed its operational value. It is considered this would be much less than is at
present believed. Carriers under trial should be equipped with flotation equipment.
48 Standard military craft of the assault or inflatable type are considered to have
advantages over the canoe in terms of airportability, stability, and ease of handling by
untrained troops. Since there would be occasions when such light craft might be
valuable in a support role their trial on lakes and fast running waters is suggested both
with and without outboard motors.
49 Clothing designed especially for northern operations is not required. It is
considered that clothing developed for summer operational use in other areas can be
utilized for future northern operations. However, the present issue battledress is not
satisfactory due to its water absorbent qualities and difficulty of drying. Ideally,
future Canadian winter clothing, with insulating liners removed, should be capable of
summer wear in northern regions. Detailed scale of issue of clothing for summer
operations is found at Appendix “A”.
90
50 There appears to be no requirement for anti-insect clothing as such. However, a
combat suit of similar design and of the same material as the Jacket and Trousers
Anti-insect is a desirable item. The normal issue battle dress does not provide
suitable protection from climatic conditions and its colour is such that it attracts large
hordes of insects. Insects are attracted by certain colours and repelled by others.
Technical investigation should be instigated in order to determine proper type of
material.
51 Both Paddles Maple and Paddles Spruce proved satisfactory. Due to the lighter
weight of the spruce paddle it is recommended that this type be adopted. All paddles
should be painted OD 7 in colour.
52 The Poncho w/hood is considered satisfactory with the addition of press studs on
all four edges.
53 Pots cooking w/lid are satisfactory, but would be improved if made of a lighter
material.
54 Pots tea X 50 are unsatisfactory. A requirement exists for a suitable tea pot and it
is felt that by improving the spout and handle of this item, a suitable pot might be
obtained.
55 Shoepac, US pattern; Boots rubber bottom, leather top, US pattern; and Boots
rubber bottom, leather top, Cdn pattern, were all generally unsatisfactory because of
their weight and the fact that they were uncomfortable and too hot. It is
recommended that investigation be commenced on the issue of an oil tanned boot of
design similar to the Boots Battle Dress of World War II.
56 Bowls 1 qt X-50 were unsatisfactory because mess tin cooking was not feasible
without a handle. Issue mess tins were preferred.
57 It is indicated that the canvas canoe is superior to the fiberglass canoe because of
its sturdier construction and flexibility. Further study is required before it can be
established if there is a requirement for canoes in northern summer operations.
58 The Caps peaked, service general pattern, [are] too heavy and [do] not retain its
shape after becoming wet. It is recommended that a cap of a design similar to the
British or US winter cap be adopted.
91
59 Cases Saw Knife and File X 50 are considered unsatisfactory. The saw would not
cut green wood and the knife was too light for use as a machete. A requirement exists
for a suitable saw and machete.
60 All the various types of repellant issued appeared suitable, however, it is
recommended that a technical study be made to establish which is best and an
unbreakable container be provided.
61 The match box waterproof is a definite requirement in summer operation. The
type used did not hold enough matches. It is recommended that a larger box be
obtained.
62 The cookers, US mountain type 1942, are satisfactory for summer use but should
be superceded by the latest US type available. Petrol consumption averaged one
gallon per 5 men per week.
63 New Developments Required
A candle provides adequate illumination for summer use. The candle, Arctic,
edible, is not considered satisfactory as it does not retain its shape in warm weather
and does not burn for a sufficient length of time.
64 A requirement exists for a suitable 2-man tent.
65 There is no requirement for the snowshoe in summer operations. After numerous
trials it was established that any type of snow or mud shoe would only hinder
movement.
Appendix A
CLOTHING & EQUIPMENT
SCALE OF ISSUE
CLOTHING
The following scale of issue is recommended for future short term operational use:
(a) Headgear
(i) Cap light weight 1
(ii) Headnet 1
(iii) Necksquare 1
92
(b) Handgear
Gloves anti-contact 1 pair
(c) Footgear
(i) Oil-tanned leather boots 1 pair
(ii) Socks GS 4 pair[s]
(iii)Insoles saran 1 pair
(d) Body Clothing
(i) String vest 1
(ii) Pyjama trouser 1 pair
(iii) Shirts flannel w/collar 1
(iv) Sweater high neck 1
(v) Combat clothing complete 1
(vi) Suspenders 1 pair
EQUIPMENT PERSONAL
In addition to personal clothing the following personal equipment is required:
(a) Battle Jerkin DIDX-50 mod. (rucksack in lieu) 1
(b) Eating utensils 1 set
(c) Mess tins 1 pair
(d) Mug enamel 1
(e) Water purification tablets 1 box
(f) Water bottle 1
(g) Emergency ration 1
(h) First field dressing 1
(j) Housewife 1
(k) Knives clasp 1
(l) Match box waterproof 1
(m) Nylon cord 25 feet
(n) Repellant insect 1 bottle
(o) Pads sleeping inflatable 1
(p) Sleeping bag (inner) w/ cover 1
(q) Poncho 1
(r) Entrenching tool 1
(s) Lypsol 1