GENERAL
1 This exercise served a most useful purpose since many of the conclusions,
which were previously based on conjecture, have now been established as fact. They
have been shown to be sound and comprehensive. Important lessons learned are
summarized in the following extracts.
2 (a) Dates: 16 Feb 50 - 15 Mar 50
(b) Area: CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:
(i) One coy gp RCR
Det RCE
One tp RC Sigs
Det RCAMC
One pl RCASC
(ii) RCAF provided tactical and transport support.
(d) Aim: The aims of the exercise were to:
(i) Determine the requirements for one infantry company
operating in the Arctic in the winter for one month.
(ii) Determine a tactical technique of operating on the barrens
in the winter.
(iii) Determine the requirements of supporting Arms and
Services.
70
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
3 Planning and Preparation
 Sound and accurate planning is vitally necessary since the consequences of
errors are more serious than in other theatres. The effect of mistakes on troops is
greater because of the extreme weather conditions which make remedial action
slower.
4 Organization
 In general, existing organizations can be adopted to meet the requirements of
arctic warfare. No special establishments are required. However, transport and plant
of a special nature must be provided, necessitating slight changes in establishment of
the number of drivers and operators.
5 Command and Control
 Control of troops during an operation has proved to be generally more difficult
due to climatic conditions:
(a) Limitation of hearing and vision due to environmental
clothing.
(b) Limitation of visibility in blowing snow.
(c) The difficulty of looking into the wind.
6 On the platoon and section levels this can be overcome to a certain extent by
the use of hand signals and where possible by the commander positioning himself on
the lee flank.
7 Engineer Support
 There is no requirement for engineer assistance to a small mobile force
equipped with oversnow transport operating in barrenland terrain, although a
reconnaissance party should be included. In a static position, however, there will
normally be a heavy demand on engineers. Road or air field construction by snow
clearance or compaction methods, water supply, and assistance in the construction of
fixed defences are a few of the tasks envisaged. This necessitates a higher proportion
than in other theatres of machine to manpower, and plant of a special nature for
snow clearance, compaction and the thawing of ice, snow and frozen ground.
71
8 Logistics
 It was established that one tractor train could supply an average load of twenty
tons over thirty miles in twenty-four hours. The net pay load was fifteen tons, five
being consumed as domestic load, over an average distance of ninety to one hundred
miles.
9 For an operation of this type, supply by air is the only feasible method.
10 Reconnaissance
 The requirement for a lightly armoured vehicle with good oversnow
performance and low silhouette for close reconnaissance by the infantry is required.
11 Mobility
 It was noticeable that the troops tended to be vehicle bound. The major factor
contributing to this was the difficulty of moving dismounted with the present weight
and bulk of equipment. Three out of every 5 men were required to either haul or
carry the group living equipment. Thus only a maximum of 40% were available to
transport infantry support weapons, extra ammunition and fulfill other operational
duties. This is unacceptable and must be reduced.
12 It was established that, for operations over barren land or similar terrain, all
transport in front line units must have good oversnow performance, and fighting
echelons must be fully tracked.
13 Vehicle maintenance must be stressed.
14 Snow before mid-December and after mid-April, in all areas in the barrenlands,
is an obstacle to dismounted mobility. Troops should be equipped either with
snowshoes or skis. Between these periods the snow is wind packed and will support a
fully loaded soldier except in areas sheltered from the wind where the snow remains
soft.
15 The total weight of living equipment, arms, ammunition and one day’s rations
for a tent group of five men is approximately five hundred pounds. The maximum
weight that can be carried while retaining adequate operational mobility is considered
to be no more than sixty pounds per man.
16 The exercise proved that the tractor train is quite unsuitable by virtue of its
slow speed (not more than two miles an hour) and vulnerability to air attack.
72
17 Assault Tactics
 The exercise confirmed that the normal tactical principles apply without any
major changes. Techniques evolved in the Western Desert during the last war are of
equal application to the barrenlands. The major difference lies in the greater
restriction on mobility. This is such, both dismounted and mechanized, that an
operation could not be undertaken with any certain prospect of success unless
mobility is improved.
18 Usually attack in such open terrain by small lightly supported forces would
only be feasible either at night or in periods of high wind and consequent poor
visibility.
19 A very high standard of training is essential for the retention of control during
the assault.
20 Consolidation is generally only possible on the occupied position because of
the lack of alternative ground in which digging-in is feasible.
21 A decision as to distance troops are to be carried forward by either air, vehicles
or a combination of both, will be made after consideration of the following factors:
(a) Climatic conditions
(i) Visibility
(ii) Audible range of sound
(iii) The amount of light.
(b) Terrain
(i) Covered approaches offered
(ii) Whether bush country or barrenland.
22 Unless the location of the enemy is known, the advance guard should advance
on a broad front. It should be preceded by 5 to 10 miles either by light armour, or
by a mobile company supported by the battalion machine gun platoon. This is to
allow sufficient distance between the reconnaissance element and the main body to
permit the latter to proceed without constant halts. The reconnaissance element will 
73
be responsible for reconnaissance both to the front and to the flanks, and will move
forward by tactical bounds.
23 Great physical and mental effort is required under conditions of extreme cold and
high windchill to remain aggressive. The cold and unusual conditions of life can, if
allowed, impose a heavy strain on morale. Every opportunity must be taken to seek
out the enemy in order to increase the strain, to deprive him of rest and time to
prepare food, and eventually to destroy him.
24 Due to lack of tactical features and the greater range of visibility on the barren
lands the approach to a position and its attack are often only feasible under
conditions of bad weather, poor visibility or darkness. Under such conditions it has
been found best to attack down wind. This method is likely to achieve a greater
degree of surprise owing to the difficulty sentries have of observing into the wind for
any but short periods. In addition, it throws the disadvantage of fighting facing the
wind on to the defenders.
25 Detailed ground reconnaissance of the enemy position, possible forming up areas,
and start lines, is essential in order to ensure that timings will be accurate. This is
especially important when operating in bad weather. Men waiting unnecessarily long
in the open are liable to become casualties from the cold. As many junior
commanders as possible must be given the opportunity of viewing the ground
providing that it will not prejudice the operation.
26 Detailed planning and careful control are essential if the attack is to be a success.
A navigating party must mark clearly the axis of advance and start line using coloured
tape, sea dye, or infra red equipment. If the advance is long, it is suggested that
intermediate bounds be marked as well, care being taken that such markings are not
placed out too far in advance of the attack thereby prejudicing surprise. For a
successful attack to be carried out under such conditions troops must be well trained
and junior leadership must be of the highest order; control must be maintained at all
times to ensure that the attack goes in at the right time and at the right place.
27 In snow, even where only a foot deep, the present smoke projectiles of both the 3”
mortar and the 25 pounder are smothered by the melting water when they burn.
Conditions unsuitable for the use of smoke are often encountered due to the strong
wind prevailing on the barren lands. This is also true in use of chemical weapons.
28 The use of flame weapons in the attack will destroy any shelter existing that could
be used by our own troops on consolidation. It is considered that such weapons
should be used with reservation, and only when the attack is beginning to falter, and
other means of helping it forward have been tried, unsuccessfully.
74
29 Due to the lack of tactical features in the barren lands it will usually be necessary
for consolidation to be carried out on the enemy position. In spite of the obvious
disadvantages it is considered that this course is more acceptable than attempting to
consolidate forward on the barren lands where the most hastily constructed defences
are a laborious and time consuming problem.
30 Careful planning is required to ensure that troops have their living equipment
brought up to them as soon as possible on consolidation.
31 The nature of the ground seldom offers other nearby positions of tactical
importance. Resolute follow-up of a retreating enemy by fresh troops will often
ensure their complete destruction.
32 Patrols
 The technique of short range patrols and their tasks remain the same.
However, the briefing prior to the patrol will have to be more than usually thorough
to ensure that the mission is accomplished and that the patrol returns to base. If the
patrol is to take place by night the time allowed should be doubled to cover the
greater difficulties of moving quietly over snow in the diffused light and maintaining
direction.
33 The size and composition of the long range patrol will be governed by the
distance to be covered and the time it will take to accomplish the task in addition to
the normal considerations. Details of loads to be carried require careful calculation in
order to ensure that the efficiency of the patrol is not impaired by carrying an excess.
34 Detailed reconnaissance could not be carried out from the existing oversnow
vehicles owing to the limited visibility through the windows which continually coat
with snow and frost. In addition any enemy hearing the vehicle approaching had
time to take cover, or lie down when caught in the open, thereby escaping possible
detection.
35 For special long range patrols there would be a use for dog teams.
36 Ground Battle
 The availability of deep snow dictates the location of defensive positions since
excavation of frozen ground is rarely possible. In hard snow, defences will have to be
built “up” rather than “down”.
75
37 No artillery was present on this exercise. Support weapons were limited to the
two and three inch mortar, neither of which are really suitable for use in the deep
snow. Additional support is an obvious necessity, and the question off the most
effective methods, bearing in mind the difficulties of movement, remain important
questions to be answered. Recoilless weapons and medium machine guns would
appear to have many applications in an infantry role. Artillery support will however
be essential to any operation of a magnitude greater than a small raid. Trials are
required to determine the best methods of carriage and transport, of all supporting
fire weapons and an assessment made of their use in northern operations.
38 Defence
 On the barrenlands a slight rise in the ground may become a tactical feature of
importance. Elevated ground may be an esker or, due to its better drainage, a lightly
wooded area. In the lea [sic] of such features drifts will form. Experience on this
exercise was that construction of a defensive position in snow on gravel eskers, took
approximately the same number of man hours as in soft earth.
39 The danger by day is from the air, requiring a high degree of dispersion
whereas the main danger by night is from ground troops infiltrating into the
defensive locality. This may be overcome by occupying positions widely dispersed by
day, when the visibility will enable the defence to observe enemy movement, and by
withdrawing to a closed perimeter by night or when weather conditions limit
visibility.
40 When holding ground in close contact with the enemy it is considered that the
present 5-man tent offers a large target, even if dug in, and that it would soon be
rendered unserviceable by shell fragments, etc. In addition, the normal practice of
changing to alternative positions when the situation demands would be impractical as
it would mean abandoning the tent and equipment so vital to existence under
conditions of extreme cold. The tent should be regarded as an emergency means of
shelter, only to be used during the period of constructing defences and snow caves or
lean-to shelters. When these shelters are completed the tent should be struck and
packed away on the sled. In this way the tent would be protected from damage by
enemy fire and would be readily available should it be necessary to reorganize on an
alternative position.
41 Environmental clothing restricts vision and hearing. At night, therefore, less
warning of enemy movement can be expected than is normal. In view of this, and of
the time taken to get out of the sleeping bag and prepare to leave the shelter, it is for
consideration whether the normal practice should be to sleep by day and work on 
76
improving defences, etc, by night. By this system, the defences would have the
following advantages:
(a) Retention of good all around observation by day.
(b) Less movement in the defensive position by day.
(c) The position is manned by night when least warning can be expected
of an enemy advance.
42 Navigation
Gridded air mosaics [,] taken during the same season as they are to be used in,
must be provided.
43 Existing service magnetic compasses are unsatisfactory for long marches. Suitable
types are now under development. In any case, they require to be supplemented by
astro-compasses or other aids to permit periodical check of the magnetic compass
type.
44 There is an established requirement for an aid to keeping direction when moving
in vehicles. No suitable equipment exists.
45 Difficulties in navigation were increased due to lack of large scale maps and to the
lack of detail on the existing maps. Before an operation takes place photo map
coverage will be required if not of the entire area then of areas of tactical importance.
46 The method used was dead-reckoning, and it proved sufficiently accurate
providing care was taken in the use of the compass and in checking distances.
Difficulties encountered were due to:
(a) Lack of landmarks on the barrenlands on which to take bearings and
set course.
(b) Difficulty in judging distance due to the lack of depth and perspective.
On occasions when a distant object was used as a guide to march on it
was found that instead of being the estimated five to six hundred yards
away it was only fifty yards distant.
(c) When moving in vehicles there was a natural reluctance on the part of
personnel taking bearings to stand outside the vehicle in the cold
resulting in hasty inaccurate bearings being taken. The prevailing 
77
wind in the Churchill area being from the northwest all the snow
anvils point in the same direction, these could be used as a rough guide
as to direction.
(d) Detours around areas of thick bush, creeks and stream beds to avoid
being bogged down sometimes threw the column off course.
(e) Errors in distance as measured on the vehicle speedometer due to track
slip were appreciable on a long run.
47 Officers and senior NCOs should be trained in the use of the astro compass. It
is a useful instrument to verify the readings of the magnetic compass which, due to
the weak horizontal field, is often affected by local interference.
48 On the battalion level it is considered that navigation should be the special
responsibility of the Intelligence officer who may, under special circumstances, be
assisted by an attached navigator.
49 Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
 Concealment is difficult to achieve. The use of all-white for vehicles, outer
clothing and all items of equipment will greatly assist in concealment.
50 Concealment of tracks is impossible; dispersion and deception must be
practiced. Deception is facilitated by the snow cover.
51 Communications
 When the wind exceeded fifteen miles per hour with blowing snow,
(approximately thirty percent of the period) interference caused by snow static was
such as to black out wireless communication by voice over seventy-five percent of the
range of the set.
52 Between platoons and company headquarters communications depend almost
entirely on a satisfactory wireless net being maintained. Due to the greater degree of
dispersion employed on the barrenlands it was found that the WS No 88 was not
adequate and the WS No 31 was used. On several occasions the former had to be
used to control sections when the distance from platoon headquarters became too
great for voice or visual control.
53 It is considered that there is a requirement for a set of the WS No 31 type to be
issued down to platoons but that a set of the WS No 88 type should not be a 
78
permanent part of the section. It is suggested that a pool of such sets be carried by
the battalion signal platoon sufficient to equip two platoons of two companies down
to sections.
54 In defensive positions use should be made of line, this helps to alleviate the
logistical problem of battery supply as well as lessening the danger to security. Due to
the difficulties in recovering field cable in the cold, greater use should be made of
assault cable.
55 Medical
 The exercise confirmed that health of the troops is in general as good or better
than in temperate climates. Frostbite necessitating medical attention is exceptional
and should be considered a matter for disciplinary action.
56 Meteorology and Topography
 The collection and collation of meteorological and topographical intelligence is
essential to any sound planning.
57 Weather changes in the Arctic are frequent and rapid and, if artillery is to give
the same high standard of fire support that the infantry has come to expect,
meteorological reports will be required more frequently. Due to meteorological
changes and inaccuracies of existing maps, predicted shoots in close support of
infantry will seldom be possible. This must be realized by commanders and whenever
possible registration of targets allowed.
58 Selection and Training of Personnel
 The exercise established that a high standard of leadership and manmanagement
is essential. Troops need not be hand-picked. However, some weeding
out during the training period must be permitted to eliminate temperamentally or
physically unsuitable men who would otherwise become liabilities during operations.
59 A very high standard of training is essential, and in the case of drivers and
mechanics it is vital. Without it the success of an operation would be seriously
prejudiced. Ten weeks is the minimum period acceptable for northern training up to
battalion level. This is broken down into three weeks indoctrination, two weeks
trades training, three weeks familiarization and two weeks collective training. Such
training to be of value must be carried out in conditions of climate and terrain with a
reasonable resemblance to those of the projected theatre of operation.
79
60 The ordinary soldier doing normal duties is not a great deal less efficient than
in other theatres. The efficiency of the tradesman in tasks requiring manual dexterity
may, however, be as little as fifty percent of normal under the worst conditions. An
increase in establishment of such trades, particularly driver mechanics and mechanics
will therefore be necessary.
61 Maps of northern areas are likely to be inaccurate or difficult to read due to the
lack of well[-]defined features, and because of the many changes in appearance of the
terrain throughout the seasons. Therefore, to ensure accurate navigation, all officers
and non-commissioned officers must be highly trained in navigation by deadreckoning.
LESSONS LEARNED - EQUIPMENT
62 Modifications to Existing Equipment
 A reduction in the weight of rations, fuel, tentage and other domestic
equipment is possible both by design and by accepting a lower standard of comfort.
63 A difficult and important problem yet unsolved is the suppression of vapour
from engine exhausts.
64 The replacement or modification to existing items will necessitate the revision of
normal equipment tables.
65 New Developments Required
Investigation is required to evolve suitable camouflage drapes for tentage, vehicles
and equipments in open snow conditions.