Canadian Military History
Volume 12 | Issue 4 Article 6
4-16-2012
Air Operations at Dieppe: An After-Action Report
Trafford Leigh-Mallory
This Feature is brought to you for free and open access by Scholars Commons @ Laurier. It has been accepted for inclusion in Canadian Military
History by an authorized administrator of Scholars Commons @ Laurier. For more information, please contact scholarscommons@wlu.ca.
Recommended Citation
Leigh-Mallory, Trafford (2003) "Air Operations at Dieppe: An After-Action Report," Canadian Military History: Vol. 12: Iss. 4, Article
6.
Available at: http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
55
The ill-fated action at Dieppe in August 1942 is
most often remembered for the heavy casualties
suffered by the Canadian land forces deployed in the
assault and the political controversy that followed
this ‘military debacle’. Lingering doubts over the
rationale for the raid, and persistent statements
that lives were lost in vain, continue to this day. But
the Dieppe Raid was much more than casualties
and questionable military decision making. It had
immediate and valuable implications on the planning
and conduct of future Allied amphibious operations,
particularly the D-Day landings on 6 June 1944.
Operation Jubilee was the first joint operation of
consequence conducted by British and Commonwealth
forces in the European theatre during the Second
World War. It was joint because the three services
– the navy, army and air force – planned and
executed the raid in concert with each other. Sadly,
for the Allied forces involved, it also demonstrated
just how unprepared they were in 1942 for joint coordination
at the operational level of war. In many
respects, the raid took the form of three separate
services executing pre-arranged single-service plans
that at best were loosely co-ordinated. So long as
their activities went according to plan, which was
the case for the navy and the air force, they were
successful. Missing was the flexibility of response
that is essential for effective impromptu action from
one or more service when enemy activity or other
unexpected developments disrupt pre-planned
operations. The post-raid Dieppe Report by the
Air Force Commander, Air Marshal Trafford Leigh-
Mallory, makes for interested reading on how the
British and, subsequently, the Anglo-American Allies
identified the key elements required for successful
joint and combined operations.
Leigh-Mallory’s report focuses on the conduct of
the air operations but it also addresses how air forces
can best be used in future operations with the navy
and the army in both pre-arranged and impromptu
actions. For Leigh-Mallory it all begins with effective
command and control. RAF doctrine also emphasized
the importance of co-ordinating the entire air effort
– fighters, bombers, reconnaissance aircraft, etc.
– from a central point. Fighter Command’s ground
control organization was used for this purpose and
it proved very successful in co-ordinating the various
offensive and defensive air operations during the
Dieppe Raid. A system of forward air control was also
established using radio links onboard headquarters
ships. This enhanced the flexibility of the air forces
by linking centralized control with decentralized
delivery. Moreover, it was on the basis of the success
achieve by the air forces during the Dieppe Raid that
the air plan for Operation Overlord was devised.
The Dieppe Raid also highlighted a number of
other important factors that affected the nature of the
contribution made by air forces in joint operations.
The primary importance of air superiority to all other
air operations, the impermanence of close support
and the many difficulties of target identification,
the benefits of an indirect application of air power
through dislocation rather than destruction of
enemy forces, and the pressing need to strengthen
cross-service understanding and develop common
operating procedures, all feature in the lessons
identified by Leigh-Mallory and the air staff from
the Dieppe Raid. Leigh-Mallory is also adept at
identifying the strengths and weaknesses of air
operations in a joint campaign and drawing the
correct lessons on how to maximize success and
minimize inherent weaknesses. His conclusions are
particularly apposite and many of the observations
made in his Dieppe Report had direct impact in both
the air plan and the wider planning for D-Day and
the Normandy Campaign.
The Dieppe Report, therefore, is one of the
more important ‘lessons learned’ documents of the
Second World War. It established a clear conceptual
framework, based on hard earned and costly
experience, for joint and combined operations
that were the pre-requisites for an Allied victory in
Europe.
David Ian Hall
(David Hall is an Air Warfare Historian on the Higher
Command and Staff Course at the Joint Services Command
and Staff College, part of the UK Defence Academy,
Shrivenham.)
Air Operations at Dieppe
An after-action report by Air Marshal Trafford Leigh-Mallory
© Canadian Military History, Volume 12, Number 4, Autumn 2003, pp.55-70.
1
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
56
Sir,
I have the honour to forward herewith my
Report on the part taken by the Air Forces in the
DIEPPE Operation on 19th August, 1942.
2. This Operation involved landings at
Dieppe by our troops at first light followed by
a withdrawal about mid-day. The Air Forces
involved operated most intensively throughout
the day from dawn until late into the afternoon.
As the withdrawal was made on the same day as
the landing a far heavier strain was imposed on
the Air Forces than would have been the case had
our occupation of Dieppe been more prolonged.
3. Our attacks from the sea were made
under the supporting fire of destroyers only
against strong and well organised shore defences.
Every effort was made therefore to provide
maximum air support and air cover during the
initial assault.
4. This Air Support under fighter cover
compromised airborne smoke and bombing
attacks on enemy battery positions and the
shooting up of the enemy’s defences by cannon
Hurricanes. Of these, smoke was by far the most
effective. It was laid by Bostons and Blenheims
dropping 100lb. phosphorus smoke bombs from
about 50 feet.
5. The main landing was timed for 0520
hours and from 0510 to 0600 hours the smoke
from these bombs covered the front of the
Eastern Headland overlooking Dieppe. Both
the Naval and Military Force Commanders
accompanying the expedition report that no
intense fire came from this Eastern Headland
until the smoke had cleared. From then onward
there was intensive fire from that direction. A
further sortie of smoke aircraft was recalled as
a result of a signal from the Military Commander
requesting cessation of air support against
Bismark and Rommel. It subsequently transpired
that our troops had not advanced as far towards
the Eastern Headland as was then thought and
smoke was in fact still urgently required. When
further smoke was finally requested only a few
smoke bombing aircraft were available as the
remainder were loaded with SCI for the final
smoke curtain to cover the withdrawal. The few
available aircraft were however dispatched to the
Eastern Headland. During our final withdrawal a
smoke curtain laid across the frontage of Dieppe
again proved most effective in covering our ships.
6. Bombing attacks on battery positions
were not as effective as smoke. I had reckoned on
certain batteries opening fire on their SOS lines
after our flank landings had begun at 0450, but
these were very slow in getting into action. They
were not firing therefore when our initial bombing
attacks were made in the half light at the time of
our main assault and the Bombers thus found it
extremely difficult to locate their targets.
7. Cannon Hurricane attacks against
defences along the front of the main beaches in
support of the assault were extremely successful
though their attacks lasted only ten minutes.
The Naval and Military Force Commanders paid
tribute to the magnificent timing of this attack,
and reported that these Fighters completely
SECRET Headquarters No.11
Group
Royal Air Force
Uxbridge, Middlesex
5 September 1942
Dieppe Report
Covering Letter by Air Force Commander
The seafront in Dieppe photographed in March 1946.
2
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
57
diverted enemy fire from our assaulting Infantry.
Unfortunately our Infantry touched down on
the beaches a few minutes late. They were thus
not able to take full advantage of the Fighters’
presence, and when the Fighters had concluded
their attacks were subjected to heavy fire from
houses along the front.
8. It was intended to employ Bombers
against any enemy reinforcements making
for Dieppe but none were located. Insistent
demands were made for continued attacks
against enemy gun positions. Bombers proved to
be quite ineffective for this task although in the
circumstances it was the only use to which they
could be put.
9. Cannon Hurricanes throughout did
magnificent work, especially during the final
stage of the withdrawal when attacking machine
and heavier gun posts on the Headlands flanking
Dieppe. These attacks temporarily diverted fire,
thereby assisting our troops to disengage and to
re-embark.
10. The most satisfactory part of the
Operation from the Air Force point of view was
the cover given to the expedition. The earlier
fighter cover sorties left ground in the dark, and
arrived over Dieppe punctually at first light. They
patrolled between about 3,000 and 6,000 feet.
This worked well, as enemy aircraft came low,
in attempts to bomb and shoot up our ships.
Later, as bombers appeared, I was informed that
they were flying between 10,000 and 12,000 feet,
some dropping their bombs from these heights,
and others diving down. I adjusted the heights of
my patrols accordingly. I also learned that Focke
Wulfs were flying at about 15,000 feet and Spitfire
IX Squadrons were ordered to patrol above them.
These changes in tactics worked well and in all
some 45 Bombers were destroyed, 11 probably
destroyed and 54 damaged. That only one major
vessel in the expedition was seriously damaged
throughout the day can be attributed to the
excellent work of the Fighter Cover Squadrons.
11. The Air/Sea Rescue organisation as a
whole worked very well. Some 20 pilots all told
were picked up from the sea. It is regretted that
Dover should have lost three out of their five
rescue boats but it was quite impossible to keep
continuous track of their activities. Whilst under
the Fighter screen they were adequately protected
but at times they gallantly went beyond this cover
and suffered casualties.
12. An unsatisfactory feature of the Operation
was the low standard of aircraft recognition
displayed by friendly gun crews. Our own aircraft
were very frequently fired on and suffered
casualties. There are two obvious remedies for
this. Naval gunners should be given intensive
training in aircraft recognition, and selected
personnel skilled in the recognition of aircraft
should be carried in each ship. The Royal
Observer Corps is the most suitable source for
providing experts for this work.
13. I consider that the total casualties we
suffered in this Operation were remarkably light
in view of the number of Squadrons taking part
and the intensity of the fighting. Details given in
Appendix “C” reveal that the highest casualties
per Squadron were 2.5 in the Army Co-operation
Tactical Reconnaissance Squadrons, and the
lowest .84 per Squadron of the Fighter Cover.
14. My main conclusions from the day’s
operations are:
(i) That smoke either dropped or laid from
aircraft is of the highest value in a combined
operation of any kind. I could quite easily
have done with treble the number of smoke
aircraft.
(ii) That such an Operation facilitates
fighting at altitudes best suited to our present
equipment.
(iii) That with the present relative strengths
in aircraft, adequate cover can be provided
for an expedition of this nature. Had the
battle been more prolonged my Squadrons
would have been in a better conditions than
the enemy to continue on the following day.
Reports since received indicate that the
German Air Force on the Western Front lost
between 150 and 200 aircraft. Although many
of our pilots had done as many as five sorties,
there was no undue sign of fatigue.
(iv) We gained much valuable information
concerning the forward control of aircraft,
both as regards Cover Squadrons and
Close Support aircraft. Controllers in the
Headquarters Ships were of the greatest
Canadian Forces Photo Unit
PMR 84-307
3
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
58
assistance to the Fighter pilots, and this
system calls for a wider application in future.
15. I cannot speak too highly of the way on which
all ranks of the Royal Air Force played their part
in this battle.
16. I am forwarding separately a list
of recommendations for decorations and
General Outline
1. Operation “JUBILEE” was a raid against
occupied territory with the purpose of capturing
by assault and occupying for a limited period,
the town of DIEPPE. Military tasks in the area
of DIEPPE included the destruction of local
defenses, power stations, dock installations – the
capture of prisoners and the destruction of the
aerodrome installations near the town. It was
also intended to capture and to remove German
Invasion barges and other crafts in the harbour.
2. The operation was planned to take
place on the first suitable morning for such a
landing between the 18th and the 23rd August.
The expedition sailed from the area of the
PORTSMOUTH Command in a succession of
groups starting at civil twilight on the evening of
the 18th August.
3. The Naval, Military and Air Forces
assigned to this operation are set out in
Appendices A and B to this report. A Sketch map
of the operation is attached at Appendix E [not
reproduced].
4. The plan prepared jointly by the three
Force Commanders involved a landing on
the outer flanks of DIEPPE at “ORANGE”
and “YELLOW” beaches by Nos. 4 and 3
Commanders, whose tanks were to neutralise
enemy Battery positions 6 miles to the East and
West of DIEPPE. At the same time a Regiment
of the 2nd Canadian Corps was to be landed to
secure “GREEN” Beach three miles to the west
of Dieppe, and to attack objectives on the West
outer perimeter of the town (HINDENBURG).
Simultaneously the Royal Regiment of Canada
was to secure “BLUE” Beach 1½ miles to the East
of DIEPPE, and objectives on the East flank of
the outer perimeter, i.e. BISMARK. Half an hour
after the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry and Essex
Scottish Regiment with the Camerons of Canada
were to make frontal assaults on “RED” and
“WHITE” Beaches in front of the town of DIEPPE.
This frontal assault was to have been supported
Report by the Air Force Commander
on the Combined Operation Against
Dieppe - August 19th, 1942.
Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory, the author of this report, was
the Air Force Commander during the Dieppe operation.
Mentions in connection with this very memorable
engagement.
Your Obedient Servant,
T. Leigh-Mallory
Air Marshal,
Air Force Commander
4
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
59
by an armoured detachment of 18 tanks. Later
a Royal Marine Commando was to land near the
Harbour of DIEPPE to demolish objectives in the
Dock area. A further echelon of tanks was then
to be landed making a total force of 38 tanks. It
was intended, when the tasks ashore had been
completed, to withdraw the whole force for reembarkation
at about 1100 hours.
Air Support
Air support was to be provided throughout
the operation as follows:
Fighter Cover
(i) Fighter cover and general protection
for the expedition throughout the hours
of daylight. The primary task of this cover
was to protect the expedition against air
attack. It was considered that the two most
dangerous periods in regard to attack from
the air would be the landing and withdrawal.
It was, therefore, decided that the strength
of this fighter cover should vary from 2 to 6
squadrons during the different phases of the
operation, with such reinforcement as might
prove necessary.
Close Support
(ii) (a) Close support, bombing and low
flying fighter attacks on selected targets were
to be made in direct support of the assault,
occupation and withdrawal.
(b) Smoke laying aircraft were to be used to
neutralize defences, both in accordance with
the pre-arranged plan and subsequently as
required at the request of the Military Force
Commander.
(c) Day Bomber Squadrons were to be
employed to attack both pre-arranged targets
and requested targets.
Reconnaissance
(iii)(a) Tactical Reconnaissance was to
be made over the area of the operation
including the lines of approach of any enemy
reinforcement.
(b) Coastal ASV reconnaissance from
Cherbourg to Boulogne was to be maintained
throughout the night prior to the assault.
(c) Fighter anti-surface vessel reconnaissance
patrols were to be maintained
throughout daylight hours.
Map drawn by Mike Bechthold ©2003
1 0 1 2 3miles
1 0 1 2 3 kilometres
DIEPPE
Petit
Berneval
Bernevalle-
Grand
cliffs
lowwater mark
high water mark
Puys
Pourville
cliffs
Varengevillesur-
Mer
Vasterivial
Quiberville
Saane
Ouvillela-
Rivière
Offranville
Petit
Appeville
Scie
Arques
Arques
Arquesla-
Bataille
Forêt d’Arques
Bois
des
Vertus
TANKS
CAMERONS
Airfield
Operation “Jubilee”
19 August 1942
ORANGE II
BEACH
ORANGE I
BEACH
GREEN
BEACH
WHITE
BEACH
RED
BEACH
BLUE
BEACH
YELLOW II
BEACH
YELLOW I
BEACH
NO.4 COMMANDO
SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN
REGIMENT
CAMERON HIGHLANDERS
OF CANADA
ROYAL HAMILTON LIGHT INFANTRY
ESSEX SCOTTISH
FUSILIERS MONT-ROYAL
ROYAL MARINE “A” COMMANDO
14TH CANADIAN ARMY TANK REGIMENT
(CALGARY TANKS)
ROYAL REGIMENT
OF CANADA
NO.3 COMMANDO
“GOEBBELS”
COASTAL BATTERY
“HITLER”
COASTAL
BATTERY
“HESS”
COASTAL
BATTERY
FIELD
BATTERY
“ROMMEL”
FIELD
BATTERY
“GORING”
FIELD
BATTERY
“HINDENBERG”
HEAVY AA
BATTERY
FIELD
BATTERY
RADAR
STATION
“BISMARK”
5
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
60
Strategical Bombing
(iv) It had been agreed between the
three Force Commanders not to lay on
any preliminary or diversionary effort with
bombers prior to the assault in order not to
jeopardise surprise. A strategical bombing
attack was, however, planned against the
enemy aerodrome of ABBEVILLE, with a
view to interfering with the operation of his
defending fighters. This attack was to coincide
with the main withdrawal from the Beaches
at which time considerable interference was
anticipated from fighters operating from the
ABBEVILLE area.
Disposition of the Air Forces
in No.11 Group
6. The following forces were available:
Day fighter forces
50 Squadrons (Cover)
6 Squadrons Close Support
Day Bomber forces
2 Squadrons
Hurricane Bomber forces
2 Squadrons
Army Co-operation forces
4 Squadrons
“Smoke” forces
3 Squadrons
These forces were disposed as set out in the
Order of Battle, at Appendix ‘A’ to this report.
7. The assembly of these forces involved
internal moves of Squadrons within No. 11
Group and the reinforcement of the Group by
15 Squadrons from outside. These extensive
movements were carried out on the 14th and 15th
August. Detail of the Squadron and necessary
maintenance unit moves were as follows:
Intake of Units
into No. 11 Group
Internal
Movements into
No. 11 Group
Fighter Squadrons 17 17
Servicing Echelon - 8
Squadron
Transports
4.5 9.5
Petrol Tankers 7 12
Starter Trolleys 32 116
Echelons without
air lift
- 6
Squadrons without
air lift
- 6
Squadrons with
air-lift
- 11
Ammunition
20 mm
Ball
20 mm
HE/1
.303 AP
.303
Incend.
20 mm
Links
727,200 727,200 7,484,400 2,474,800 1,454,400
Petrol
(100 Octane)
712,000 gallons
Enemy Dispositions
9. The German Air Force had approximately
260 frontline single engined aircraft between
Brest and Texel. These were disposed as follows:
Holland 40
Pas de Calais 125
Brest to Fecamp 95
10. The German policy since June this year
has been to concentrate these air forces on a
few aerodromes along the Western Front. The
German system of reinforcement is flexible up
to a point, with extreme mobility of units from
one place to another. On the other hand he finds
difficulty in adapting his control areas quickly to
these reinforcements.
11. Apart from the reconnaissance units
and a small number of aircraft used for antishipping,
the whole of the German bomber force
on the Western Front has been in use by night
only. This force was disposed mainly in the
Dutch bases at EINDHOVEN, SOESTERBERG,
GILZE RIGEN and DEELEN. It numbered some
120 long range bombers with a further 100 at
BEAUVAIS, CREIL, CHATEAUDUN, CHARTRES
and RENNES. Reports from Pilots during the
Operation JUBILEE indicate that a small number
of bombers from reserve training units were
brought into action. It was considered unlikely
that he would be able to bring his fighters from
as far West as Brest or as far North as Holland
early in the operation. Thus the Fighter forces
likely to oppose us in the early stages were from
the ABBEVILLE area – 50, BEAUMENT-LEROGER
area – 50, CHER-BOURG area – 20,
together with possible reinforcements from ST.
OMER and COURTRAI – approximately 30 and
45 respectively.
CFPU PMR 84-370
8. The following supplies of ammunition and
petrol were accumulated at Stations in No. 11
Group immediately prior to the Operation.
6
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
61
Command
12. Captain J. H. Hallett, R. N. was the Naval
Force Commander.
Major-General F. N. Roberts, MC was the
Military Force Commander.
Air Marshal T.L. Leigh-Mallory, CB, DSO, Air
Officer Commanding No. 11 Group, was the Air
Force Commander.
Operational Control
13. Control of all air forces was exercised
direct by the Air Force Commander from his
operational Headquarters at Uxbridge. Aircraft
were despatched on instructions issued from No.
11 Group Operations Room through the normal
Group to Sector, Sector to Squadron Dispersion
Point channels. The Force Commanders afloat
were able to ask at any time for special air
support from bombers or fighters by means of
the W/T link provided between Portsmouth and
the Headquarters Ship, and a listening watch
maintained at No. 11 Group Headquarters.
14. The lowest Squadron in the Fighter Cover
operated on No. 11 Group Guard No. 1 frequency
so that the Fighter Controller in either of the
Headquarters Ships could communicate with the
Squadrons of the Fighter Cover.
15. All outgoing Close Support Fighter
sorties called the Headquarters Ship by VHF
R/T when approaching the enemy coast. The
Fighter Controller in the Headquarters Ship
then, at the request of either the Military or Naval
Commanders re-directed Fighter sorties to attack
any suitable alternative target which the situation
demanded.
16. Despite the fact that a very large number
of Squadrons were being used throughout the
operation (over 60 squadrons) this method of
control worked admirably. During the whole
course of this very gruelling test of the normal
ground control organisation in No. 11 Group
there was no breakdown.
17. This proved conclusively that the existing
Fighter ground control organisation, although
primarily designed for defensive purposes,
provides all the facilities required for the
direction of offensive operations within normal
fighter range. The co-ordination of the Air Force
effort from a central point is essential. The Group
Operations Room with its extensive network of
communications augmented by advanced W/T
and R/T communication with local Commanders
in the expedition proved to be ideal.
18. The local control by the Headquarters
Ships proved equally successful. The bottom
Squadron of all Fighter Cover formations
operated on No. 11 Group Guard I frequency, and
were directed on to enemy aircraft by a Controller
in Headquarters Ship No.2. Close Support
Squadrons operated on a Tangmere Sector
Operational frequency and were directed on to
targets as required by the Military Commander
by a Controller in Headquarters Ship No.1. Thus
the two Headquarters Ships accompanying the
expedition were used to assist in the control of
air forces as would an AASC during a land battle.
19. In the majority of cases Close Support
Fighter Pilots had been briefed, as to the targets
to be attacked, before leaving the ground, but
experience gained during the operation showed
conclusively that it was possible to re-direct
Fighters or to give them assistance in finding their
target by local direction. Similarly Fighters were
frequently assisted in sighting enemy aircraft by
This photo of the Dieppe coastline was taken during the raid on 19 August 1942.
CFPU PMR 84-370
7
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
62
the running commentary given by the controller
in Headquarters Ship No. 2. There is no doubt
that this local control was largely responsible
for the high percentage of interceptions made
on enemy aircraft, thus greatly minimising the
effectiveness of enemy air attack on ships and
troops.
20. To summarise – the system of control
from the Group, through Sectors, and through
the Headquarters ships, adequately met all
requirements. The excellent communications and
flexible control facilities of the normal Fighter
organisation at home proved most efficient for
such combined operations.
Tactical Reconnaissance
21. Tactical Reconnaissance units suffered
a higher casualty rate than any other type. This
was due to the deep penetration required of them
which necessitated their patrolling well beyond
the Area of Fighter Cover. The coast roads leading
to Dieppe were reconnoitred every half hour,
and those from Amiens, Rouen, Yvetot and Le
Havre, places from which reinforcements might
be expected, every hour.
22. Aircraft took off from GATWICK, flew to
the Dieppe area via the BEACHY HEAD route,
made contact with the Command Ship, and then
proceeded on their allotted tasks. On completion
of each sortie Tactical Reconnaissance pilots flew
sufficiently near to the ship to ensure satisfactory
R/T transmission of any information they had.
They then returned immediately to GATWICK
and passed their information by telephone to the
Air Force Commander.
23. The only movement worthy of note was
that of about five light tanks approaching Dieppe
reported at 1210 hours.
24. The range of the HF fitted in the Tactical
Reconnaissance aircraft proved inadequate.
ASV Reconnaissance Patrols
25. Aircraft of Coastal Command maintained
ASV search patrols throughout the hours of
darkness on the flanks of the expedition during
the passage. No sightings were made.
General Narrative
26. The operation is conveniently divided into
five distinct phases. The first covers the outward
passage and the landings on various beaches.
The second covers the period when progress was
being made towards the predetermined objectives
ashore. The third phase covers the withdrawal
of landing parties to their beaches. The fourth
period extends to the time when the withdrawal
was complete. The fifth phase covers the return
passage to England.
Time
(2000 hours) 27. The expedition sailed
from the area of the Portsmouth Command in a
succession of Groups on the evening of the 18th
August, headed by the destroyer “CALPE”.
(2130 hours) 28. Shortly before dark the
convoy, which consisted of 217 craft in all,
steamed past the “CALPE” (Headquarters Ship
No. 1) to be checked.
(0115 hours) 29. In the early hours of the
19th August, the “CALPE” led the way through an
enemy minefield, which had already been swept
by a flotilla of mine-sweepers from Newhaven. A
quarter of an hour later the whole convoy was
safely through the minefield but it was noticed
that the LCTs had lagged some way behind.
(0300 hours) 30. Shortly after 0300 hours
the first landing craft were lowered from their
Refuelling a Canadian Spitfire. Nine Canadian
squadrons took part in Operation Jubillee, including
six Spitfire squadrons, two of Mustangs, and one of
Bostons.
CFPU PL 10706
CFPU PMR 84-376
8
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
63
parent ships. The lighthouse on the cliff outside
DIEPPE was then visible. Up to this time the
outward passage was comparatively uneventful,
but a misfortune now occurred.
(0320 hours) 31. T h e l a n d i n g c r a f t
conveying No. 3 Commando, which had been
detailed to attack “YELLOW” Beach (6 miles East
of DIEPPE) came into contact with an enemy
convoy which included armed trawlers, and a
number of our small craft were sunk. These
losses resulted in the failure to subdue coast
defence batteries to the East of DIEPPE.
32. There was no other enemy activity
throughout the night and no attempt was made
by the enemy to reconnoitre for our approaching
expedition. It would seem, therefore, that the
force was assembled and dispatched without
disclosure. It would have achieved complete
tactical surprise if No. 3 Commando had not
unfortunately been intercepted by the enemy
trawlers en route.
Phase 1 (0445 – 0550 hours)
33. Despite the chance contact with enemy
ships en route, the forces arrived at DIEPPE
approximately on time, and the initial naval
bombardment of selected objectives was carried
out as arranged.
34. In the opening attack, escort was provided
for smoke carrying aircraft of Bomber and Army
Co-operation Commands laying a smoke screen
over the Cliff Headland to the East of Dieppe
Harbour. This was most effective lasting from
0510 to 0600 hours. Intruder aircraft engaged
each of the two gun Batteries to the South of
Dieppe with bombs and machine guns. Hurricane
Bombers, Fighters and Spitfires attacked the
coastal emplacements, and beach defences.
Cannon fighters provided direct support to our
troops as they landed at “RED” and “WHITE”
Beaches in front of DIEPPE and were successful
in centralising enemy fire along the front from
A grainy air photo of Dieppe taken during the raid.
9
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
64
Above: This group of pilots from No.401 Spitfire
Squadron, commanded by Squadron Leader Keith
Hodson, was photographed on the day of the
Dieppe assault as the pilots waited for their aircraft
to be refuelled in between flights. Shown in the
group are (l.-r.) Flight Sergeant Ed Gimbel, who had
shared the probable destruction of two Fw.190s two
days previously, F/L Jim Whitham, who shared the
destruction of another Fw.190 on the same day and
who probably destroyed one Fw.190 and damaged
another on the day of the Dieppe affair, Flight Sgt.
Bob Reesor, who also scored a probable earlier in
the week, P/O B. “Scotty” Murray, who shared the
destruction of a Fw.190 with F/L Whitham two days
before the Dieppe show and who scored a probable
and a damaged on the day of the big air battles.
Left: P/O B. “Scotty” Murray just back from a flight
on the day of the Dieppe air battles. On that day, he
scored a probable and a damaged during one flight.
Two days earlier, he had shared in the destruction
of a Fw.190 with F/L Jim “Whit” Whitham while the
squadron was escorting Flying Fortresses of the
USAAF to Rouen.
CFPU PL 10627
CFPU PL 10628
10
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
65
0515 to 0525. During the landings there was
little opposition from enemy aircraft.
35. In phase I our surface forces kept to
their time table despite shelling by enemy shore
batteries. Batteries situated to the south of the
town were slow to commence firing but when they
did were particularly destructive. Further smoke
screens were requested to cover our landings, a
necessity which had already been anticipated and
additional smoke aircraft were already on their
way to the scene of action.
Phase 2 (0550 – 0730 hours)
(0640 hours) 37. The Western Commando
had been completely successful in overcoming
the battery position at HESS and killing all the
personnel. The final assault on this position
was assisted by a Squadron of Spitfires which
attacked HESS Battery at 0620 just before our
men were due to attack. This assistance was
successful and the attack was made immediately
our aircraft had finished. The CP of this Battery
was in a Lighthouse close by which had been
attacked by two Spitfires at first light. The
landing on the Beach 1½ miles to the West of
Dieppe (GREEN Beach) was also successful,
capturing the RDF station and destroying their
other objectives.
38. The Eastern flank (BLUE Beach) initial
attack had, however, failed. A second attack
made at approximately 0740 resulted in a small
penetration, which, however, did not succeed
in silencing the guns on the Eastern Headland.
In the main landing on Red and White Beaches
the tanks were held up by the inability of the
Engineers to land the explosives necessary to
blast a passage through the promenade wall,
with the result that the majority of the tanks were
stranded, and the infantry were disembarked
whilst the tanks were still immobilised. Large
white houses overlooking the Beaches gave
considerable trouble and bombardment by
destroyers was requested from our troops
ashore.
(0605 hours) 39. In view of these difficulties
a further smoke screen was called for on the
Eastern Headland “BISMARK” but no aircraft
were immediately available for this. The smoke
carrying aircraft were at once ordered to load up
with smoke bombs and take off as soon as they
were ready.
(0621 hours) 40. Earlier attacks had failed
to silence the Eastern Headland defences and the
gun positions (HITLER and GOERING) South of
Dieppe continued to shell the Beaches.
(0605-0615 hours) 41. Twelve Bostons
had already been ordered off to bomb HITLER
and were quickly airborne.
(0640-0645 hours) 42. ROMMEL was
also still giving trouble and the landing on BLUE
Beach had in consequence failed. The only
remaining Bostons were, therefore, detailed to
attack ROMMEL followed by a further 6 when
they became available.
(0723 hours) All these Batteries continued to
harass our troops and an attack was called for
on BISMARK. A Squadron of Cannon Hurricanes
had already been dispatched to be “on call” to
the Headquarters Ship by 0740 and a second
Squadron of Cannon Hurricanes was despatched
to be “on call” to the Headquarters Ship 20
minutes later.
43. Thus at the end of the second phase
the RDF Station, 5 light AA positions had been
captured and the gun battery behind the ORANGE
Beach had been demolished. Throughout this
period air cover was afforded to the troops
against moderate enemy fighter opposition; the
number of enemy aircraft patrolling the area at
any one time during this period did not exceed
one Squadron.
Phase 3 (0730 – 1050 hours)
(0730 hours) This third phase covers the
withdrawal to the Beaches.
(0752 hours) 45. At 0752 two Cannon
Hurricane Squadrons were ordered to engage
enemy E-boats which had been reported
proceeding south from BOULOGNE. Two
fighter cover Squadrons accompanied these
Hurricanes. At the same time a message was
received cancelling the support on “BISMARK”
and “ROMMEL”. The Air Force Commander was
always doubtful whether this latter message
was genuine, but had to act on it as information
CFPU PL 10627
11
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
66
was received within a few minutes that a second
landing in BLUE Beach had been successful.
At this time one Bomber Squadron was on its
way to bomb ROMMEL and was beyond range
of recall. Aircraft were also on their way to drop
smoke bombs on the Eastern Headland; these
were recalled.
(0830 hours) 46. Th e s i t u a t i o n h a d
meanwhile deteriorated on the Western flank.
Heavy opposition was also coming from the
Western Headland and the houses behind the
beach. Machine gunning and shelling continued
undiminished from the Headland and from
“HINDENBURG”. (0916 hours)
(0926 hours) 47. A Squadron of Hurricane
Bombers and a Squadron of Cannon Fighters
covered by two Spitfire Squadrons were ordered
to attack these positions.
(0940 hours) 48. The situation in various
areas continued to grow critical and due to
various delays the time scheduled for the
evacuation was deferred from 1030 hours to
1100 hours.
(0956 hours) 49. At 0956 the following
reply was received to the Air Force Commander’s
request for a situation report:
“Situation too obscure to give useful report. Air
co-operation faultless. Enemy air opposition now
increasing. Have you any questions.”
(1004 hours) 50. A few minutes later a
request was received for a 30 minute smoke
screen along RED and WHITE Beaches from
1100 to 1130 hours: Thruxton was ordered to
prepare as many aircraft as possible with SCI and
as many aircraft as could be fitted were ordered
off for this purpose. The Military Commander
gave GREEN Beach third priority after RED and
WHITE Beaches for smoke, and 3 Blenheims with
an escort Squadron were detailed to this task.
51. At 1039 hours a request was made for
maximum fighter support against machine gun
positions on both Headlands.
(1039 hours) 52. Four Close Support
Squadrons were ordered to these attacks with
two Squadrons as cover.
(1047 hours) 53. A further call for support
against the Headland came in 20 minutes later,
by which time Squadrons were already on their
way. At this time it appeared that the LCAs were
arriving at WHITE Beach, ready to re-embark
the forces on shore. Thus at the beginning of
this third period the right wing of our landing
Pilots of Canada’s No.401 Squadron group themselves around Air Marshal A.M. Bishop during his visit to
the unit in September 1942 to congratulate them on their performance during the Dieppe operation.
CFPU PL 10747
12
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
67
forces had made progress but those in the centre
including the tanks were held up.
54. Enemy air opposition had by now
increased considerably, 20 to 30 fighters being
seen continuously in the area until 1000 hours
when enemy bombers appeared escorted by
fighters.
(1050 hours) 55. The enemy employed
a considerable number of bombers from
aerodromes in Holland in addition to small
numbers from BEAUVAIS. To counter this
increased enemy activity and in order to cover
re-embarkation, which was about to commence,
the strength of fighter cover over DIEPPE
was increased from 3 to 6, and at times to 9
Squadrons. Heavy casualties were inflicted on
the enemy bombers who were now concentrating
on shipping and landing craft.
Phase 4 (1050 – 1410 hours)
56. The fourth phase marks the withdrawal
from the Beaches. During this time the gun
batteries BISMARK and HINDENBERG on the
East and West Headlands continued their intense
bombardments, and in many areas the situation
was more than critical.
57. Until the expedition had safely withdrawn,
frequent and urgent requests were received for
bombing and close support attacks in enemy
gun positions, and calls for smoke screens were
made.
58. At 1030 hours a most successful prearranged
attack was made by 24 Fortress
Bombers escorted by four Spitfire IX Squadrons,
on the enemy Fighter aerodrome at ABBEVILLEDRUCAT.
Some twenty-five tons of high explosives
and a large number of incendiaries were dropped.
Many bursts were seen in the North West
dispersal areas and on the run-ways whilst fires
were started in woods adjoining the dispersal
areas. Bursts were also observed on storage sites
and clouds of black smoke were seen rising from
the whole target area. This very accurate bombing
of dispersal areas and run-ways – bombs fell near
to at least 16 aircraft in those areas – caused
considerable confusion to the enemy, and he was
denied the use of his aerodrome for probably
2 hours, his aircraft being instructed to land
at alternatives. The ABBEVILLE control was
out of action until the evening, when a new and
unfamiliar voice came on the air.
59. This attack on Abbeville was followed by
a diversionary feint made towards OSTEND by
a Typhoon Wing in an endeavour to draw enemy
Air Forces away from Dieppe.
(1100 hours) 60. The enemy air activity by
this time had increased and he had altered his
Flight Sgt. Mehew Zobell, brought this Spitfire back safely home after the Dieppe affair despite the fact that his forehead
had been injured - not seriously - by an exploding cannon shell from an enemy fighter. The holes which the shell made in
the cowling of his cockpit are clearly visible. In the other picture, the severe damage to his rudder can be seen. Despite
this he made a perfect landing. His only complaint was that the medical officer would not allow him to fly during the rest
of the day. “I missed a lot of fun,” he said bitterly.
CFPU PL 10629
CFPU PL 10630
13
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
68
form of attack. The tactics of our fighter cover
were changed to meet this situation by adding a
high Squadron of Spitfire IXs at 23,000 feet.
(1200 hours) 61. Dur ing thi s pe r iod
bombing attacks were made by Boston Squadrons
on BISMARK and HINDENBURG.
62. Further attacks were also made by three
Close Support Squadrons and smoke was laid
between the East and West Headlands across the
port of DIEPPE to cover the final withdrawal.
63. The constant requests for bombing,
close support and smoke were met to the limit,
demands frequently being anticipated as a result
of the clear picture available in the Fighter Control
Room and Uxbridge. All types of Squadrons were
called on to operate a shuttle service.
64. It was decided that Tactical Reconnaissance
aircraft could serve no further useful purpose and
their operational flights were discontinued.
65. In the final withdrawal a maximum effort
was directed to protect our re-embarking forces
from both ground and air attack.
(1310 hours) 66. By 1310 hours it appeared
doubtful whether any more troops could
be evacuated. An hour later the last craft was
reported 3 miles from the French Coast. The
withdrawal from DIEPPE had been completed.
Phase 5 (1410 – 2245 hours)
67. As our forces cleared the enemy coast
smoke-laying aircraft laid a protective screen
between them and the enemy’s defences.
68. The Typhoon Wing was then reinforcing
our Spitfires in intercepting enemy bombers
coming from the direction of Holland.
(1428 hours) 69. Fi g h t e r Co v e r wa s
maintained throughout the long voyage home.
(1545 hours) 70. There was considerable
deterioration in the weather and the enemy took
advantage of the increasing cloud cover to send
out single bombers to attack our ships as they
neared the English Coast. One or two formations
of FW 190s were also employed for this purpose.
In addition to standing cover over the returning
convoy, 86 interception sorties were made.
Appreciation of the
Enemy’s Air Effort
71. The enemy reacted almost as had been
foreseen; at first he did not appear to appreciate
the scale of our effort and he used only 25/30
fighters in each sortie. As the day went on the
strength of his sorties increased to between
50/100 aircraft. At first fighter bombers, and
later, when the moves from Holland had been
effected, night bombers in increasing numbers
were used until all his resources on the Western
Front were in action.
72. Early in the day enemy air effort was
confined entirely to fighters patrolling the area
in small numbers. Occasionally dive attacks on
our ships were made from height. The German
control merely instructed his aircraft to go to
the DIEPPE area where large numbers of British
bombers and fighters were operating.
73. It was not until about 1000 hours, some
six hours after our assault, that our patrols
encountered enemy bombers. It would seem,
therefore, that these had not been at a high state
of readiness.
74. The first bombers came in small numbers
and were escorted by FW 190s. Later larger
formations up to 15 in number operated under
the main German Fighter Force which was
engaging our cover patrols. Reports from pilots
indicate that a small number of reserve training
bombers were included.
75. The German Bomber Force throughout
confined its attentions to our convoy and did not
harass our troops ashore. A bomber jettisoning
its bombs crippled HMS Berkeley shortly before
1300 hours. She was later sunk by our own
forces.
The attack on ABBEVILLE – DRUCAT at 1030
hours was undoubtedly successful in striking
at the enemy’s most congested aerodrome at
a critical period in the operation. This attack
was timed and prearranged to this end and it
undoubtedly succeeded in considerable reducing
the efforts of the GAF against our expedition.
14
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6
69
Casualties
76. Details concerning air effort, serviceability
of aircraft, casualties to aircraft and personnel
and results achieved by the Air Forces during
operations at Dieppe are shown in Appendix “C”
to this report.
77. The very low rate of casualties suffered
in all types of Squadrons during each intensive
daylight operation in close support of a combined
expedition are of particular interest.
Administration
78. The concentration and redisposition
of Air Forces in No. 11 Group was for security
reasons undertaken as a reinforcing exercise,
under the title of VENOM.
79. No serious administrative difficulties were
experienced throughout the operation, though the
shortness of the period of activity did not perhaps
bring to light some of the difficulties which might
have arisen had it been more prolonged.
Communications
80. Communications on the whole were
excellent. Signals were promptly and clearly
received at Uxbridge. The majority of outgoing
messages from Uxbridge to the Headquarters
Ship retransmitted by Portsmouth, did not reach
the Military Commander afloat, so that requests
for Close Support from the Ship were often
repeated unnecessarily.
81. The Control organisation in the Ships
worked very efficiently and this system is capable
of further expansion and development.
82. Additional land line links to Uxbridge
for the operation worked fairly satisfactorily,
although some of the temporary lines were not
up to the high standard necessary.
83. The operations and Intell igence
Teleprinter Operators worked at high pressure
but were able to handle the traffic without serious
delays.
Conclusions
84. (i) This operation showed that such
expeditions can be successfully supported and
protected by home defence Fighters operated by
the normal Home Defence Fighter Organization,
assisted by forward direction through R/T in
ships. This efficient organization is fully capable
of so operating Air Forces to the limit of present
fighter range and is bound to be superior to any
alternative forward control scheme which could
never provide anything like equal facilities.
(ii) Landings on such a scale in occupied territory
in daylight effectively pin the enemy air forces
to an area enabling our supporting Fighters to
operate at height and in conditions best suited
to them. In existing circumstances the enemy is
forced to employ his night bombers in daylight,
at times unescorted by fighters thus sacrificing an
appreciable part of his limited bomber resources.
(iii) Close Support attacks by Cannon
Fighters are effective only whilst they are engaging
their targets, but they have no lasting material
effect on well protected defensive positions.
they are extravagant in as much as each aircraft
is in action for a few seconds only. To achieve
any lasting moral effect would demand such
a large expenditure of these Fighters that our
efforts in other directions would be reduced to
unacceptable proportions.
(iv) A very much higher standard of interservice
recognition is essential in combined operations.
As modern aircraft are all so alike, it is imperative
that all personnel have a very thorough knowledge
of and frequent practice in recognition.
(v) Airborne smoke is extremely valuable in
combined Operations. Smoke is often likely to
have better effect than bombing, particularly if it
is intended to protect surface forces against well
placed gun positions. It is essential, however,
to speed up the present rate of turn round for
smoke carrying aircraft and to be able quickly to
alternate between SCI and bombs and to change
over from one to the other on the ground in the
shortest possible time.
15
Leigh-Mallory: Air Operations at Dieppe
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2003
70
Enemy Casualties by Type
destroyed probable damaged
Bombers 41 17 58
Fighters 47 29 85
Total 88 46 143
Reports received indicate that the German Air Force on
the Western Front lost between 150 and 200 aircraft.
Average Casualties per Squadron
Squadron type No. of Squadrons pilots killed or
missing
Ave. casualties per
squadron
Close Support. (including
Hurricane Bombers) 8 15 1.87
Army Co-operation 4 9 2.25
Smoke Laying 3 3 1
Bombers 2 1 .5
Cover Squadrons 50 42 .84
Total Pilots - 70 Crew - 10
(vi) Some difficulty was experienced at times in
obtaining detailed target requirements from the
Headquarters Ship. This problem of locating and
selecting suitable targets for Air attacks, together
with methods for defining, to the Air Force
Commander required careful interservice study
so that the Air effort is always profitably
employed.
Certain major conclusions together with my
recommendations for awards are being
forwarded by me in a separate letter.
T. Leigh-Mallory
Air Marshal
Air Force Commander
Appendix C
Operation “JUBILEE”
Effort Enemy Casualties Our Casualties
No. of aircraft sorties destroyed probable damaged
pilots & crew aircraft
missing killed destroyed
Fighters 2399 87 ½ 45 143 57 - 88
Army Co-op
Tactical
Reconnaissance
72 ½ - - 9 - 10
2 Group 62 - - - 1 3 1
Smoke laying a/c 50 - 1 - 3 7 7
Coastal 7 - - - - - -
American
Bomber
Command
24 - - - - - -
Total 2614 88 46 143 70 10 106
16
Canadian Military History, Vol. 12 [2003], Iss. 4, Art. 6
http://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol12/iss4/6