OPERATIONAL FUNCTIONAL TASKS
The broad Operational Functional Task areas provide an excellent framework for
analyzing the operational lessons learned from Operation SHINGLE. While analysis of all the
tasks can provide lessons, focus will be given to Operational Maneuver, and Operational C2.
OP1 - Operational Movement and Maneuver
As discussed above, an amphibious assault is the ultimate form of a joint operational
maneuver. In this case, Allied forces were committed to executing a “left hook” behind the
German lines, but then failed to continue their maneuver inland to accomplish their objectives.
The British believed the landing force would cause a German reaction favoring the Allied attacks
near Cassino. The American operational leader of the landing force, Lucas, never a believer in
the plan, decided to consolidate his forces on the beachhead and prepare for a counterattack
rather than risking any advance. He had studied Salerno and Gallipoli and concluded that to push
ahead and over-stretch himself before he was strongly ashore would be fatal. The Operations
Order of the 5th Army reinforced his opinion, uncompromisingly asserting that the ‘Advance was
not to take place unless it can be synchronized with the operations of the remainder of 5th Army
in close vicinity of the beach-head’31
OP5 - Operational Command and Control (C2)
“Never far from anyone’s thoughts was the near-disaster of Salerno.”32 On the fifth day
of the Salerno invasion, the Germans almost succeeded in driving the Allies off of the beaches,
but the beachhead was held and the Germans began their fighting withdrawal up the Italian
13
peninsula. The Germans were concerned about the surrender of the Italians, and sought to
ensure the safe withdrawal of forces from the southern Italy to the Rome area. “Despite the
victory, the Salerno landing left the Allies with a legacy that hung like a dark cloud over the
entire Italian campaign.”33 Despite this setback, progress was generally good: Italy had
surrendered in September, and the Allies were maintaining constant pressure on German forces.
For SHINGLE, American General Lucas commanded the 6th Corps, which included one
British and one U.S. division, fighting in support of the 5th U.S. and 8th British Armies, all under
the 15th Army Group, commanded by British General Alexander. The combined staffs proved to
be too much.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual 3500.04C includes in its definition of
Operational C2 the requirement to provide “operational guidance, direction and vision to
assigned forces.”34 Probably the single most significant reason for the operational failure of
SHINGLE was the lack of guidance and vision from the operational commanders, primarily due
to the friction that developed at higher levels between British and American officers. As
previously described, the British saw the operation as an elaborate bluff, requiring great risk.
The Americans saw it as an unwise use of resources and sought to minimize the risk. To solve
this discrepancy they frequently chose to simply not communicate. This C2 problem can be
illustrated by some examples:
Starting at the strategic level - the British saw the Mediterranean as a vital part of the war
against Germany. It would lead to the “soft underbelly” of Europe, as Churchill described it.
They were not against OVERLORD, but they believed that fighting a prolonged Mediterranean
action could sufficiently weaken the Germans so that the inevitable cross-channel invasion
would be assured success. The Americans, who were also taxed by a war in the Pacific against
14
the Japanese, looked for a decisive attack against the Germans to end the war more quickly.
They had been working since the third month after the attack at Pearl Harbor on an operation
designed “to get troops across the Channel and into a major battle on the classic invasion routes
into Germany.”35 The differences of the two nations were embodied in their principle military
advisors. General George C. Marshall, the U.S. Army Chief of Staff favored a direct thrust into
northwest Europe, while General Sir Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, favored
the indirect, or peripheral, strategy. Marshall advised Roosevelt bluntly in May of 1943 that
“The Mediterranean is a vacuum into which America’s great military might could be drawn off
until there was nothing left with which to deal the decisive blow against the Continent.”36
Ten days before the assault, an important difference emerged between Alexander’s and
Clark’s visions regarding the Alban Hills. Alexander repeated to Clark that the objective of the
landing was “to cut the enemy’s main communications in the Colli Laziali [another name for the
Alban Hills] area Southeast of Rome, and to threaten the [German] rear.”37 As Clark interpreted
this directive, the 5th Army was “(a) To seize and secure a beachhead in the vicinity of Anzio and
(b) Advance on Colli Laziali.”38 Clark, who had commanded at Salerno, expected to see the
same pattern of German opposition and turned his emphasis to securing the beachhead, diggingin,
and holding a large reserve force to face the counter attacks. By Alexander’s plan the Anzio
forces were to move inland and take the critical Alban Hills. Clark saw the 5th Army capturing
them as part of its drive north.
In the event that the German resistance was slight, the 6th Corps, the invasion force under
Lucas, was expected to advance “on” the Alban Hills, but it would be the personal decision of
the corps commander whether to attack or defend. Lucas admitted that he had no faith in the
plan; he wrote in his diary, “in fact, there is no military reason for SHINGLE.”39 He also must
15
have had in his mind the advice he received from Clark, just before the convoys were to sail
from Naples; “Don’t stick your neck out as I did at Salerno.”40 It seems clear that he went ashore
determined not to advance to the hills and never communicated his intentions to his British
subordinates.
Major-General W.R.C. Penney, commander of the British 1st Infantry Division - one of
the two divisions to make the amphibious assault - had been pressing for weeks to get any details
about the invasion plan after the initial landing. He received the reply:
“This directive does not include plans for an advance from the beachhead to
or towards the final objective. Such plans are extremely tentative: this advance is
not likely to take place unless it is synchronized with operations of the remainder
of the Fifth Army in close vicinity of the beachhead.”41
By the middle of February, the Allied commanders were feeling the strain of sustained
combat operations. While both Lucas and Penney had written in their diaries before SHINGLE
that they had a “mutual confidence, trust and liking of one another,”42 there was now a sense of
mutual frustration and dissatisfaction. On the evening of 10 February, Penney wrote a letter
which was a “formidable indictment of Lucas as a field commander.”43 On 16 February, Major-
General Truscott and Major-General V. Evelegh were both appointed as Deputy Corps
Commanders to Lucas in an effort to smooth inter-Allied relations. Aside from the international
aspect of command, Lucas did not seem to give clear and decisive guidance, and his conferences
were likened by some to “an inefficient company’s meetings.”44 On 23 February, Clark made
Lucas his deputy army commander and command of the 6th Corps went to Truscott. “Johnny
Lucas was ill – tired physically and mentally from the long responsibility of command in
battle...I…had for some time been considering a change”45
Verney correctly grasped the problem that a combined C2 structure mixed with differing
commanders’ visions were to produce, “It was unsatisfactory to have both nations involved;
16
either an all-British effort or an all-American operation would have solved many problems of
administration and command.”46
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
“I felt like a lamb being led to the slaughter”
-Remark by Major General Lucas, Commander U.S. 6th Corps, regarding Anzio.47
Conclusions about the Anzio landing have changed somewhat as the years since its
execution pass. There are those, including Churchill, who view it as a strategic success in that
the German forces expended in Italy were unavailable in France. But that is not the point.
SHINGLE was planned as an operation, and as such it failed. The U.S. Army Center of Military
History makes this clear by writing, “The operation clearly failed in its immediate objectives of
outflanking the Gustav Line, restoring mobility to the Italian campaign, and speeding the capture
of Rome.48 If it was indeed an operational failure, then there must be blame, but where to assign
it?
Once the blame would have been placed squarely at the feet of Lucas, as Alexander
himself did when he stated “…Lucas, missed his opportunity by being too slow and cautious. He
failed to realize the great advantages that surprise had given him. He allowed Time to beat
him.”49 Even mild defenders of Lucas acknowledge it cannot be denied that “for Lucas to lose
contact with the Germans for two and a half days was wholly wrong.”50 Churchill blames Clark
and Lucas:
“In all his talk with me…Alexander envisaged that the essence of the battle
was the seizure of the Alban Hills with the utmost speed, and to this end I was
able to obtain from the United States their 504th Parachute Regiment…but at the
last moment General Clark cancelled [it]…and the American General
Lucas…seems to have had the idea in his mind that at all costs he must be
prepared for a counterattack…the whole operation became stagnant.”51
17
Some now seek to distribute blame to Alexander and Churchill. Blumenson writes, “Alexander
failed also. The concept was daring, but he was too much the gentleman to make it work;”52 and
“Churchill’s Gallipoli of World War II, Anzio was not so catastrophic a failure, but was a
blunder nonetheless.”53 While Churchill may have been the unstoppable force to resurrect
SHINGLE after it had been dropped in December of 1943, he shouldn’t be held to blame for its
failure. It would be an extraordinary commander, in my opinion, who could directly influence
the outcome of a major battle once it has begun. To blame one seems like a far too easy solution.
Kesselring himself seems to have hit the mark most accurately, noting that the operation
was only half-attempted. It was doomed from the beginning as it was given insufficient
resources and placed in an untenable timeline – the unfortunate product of a Space-Time-Force
interaction.
Operation SHINGLE can offer today’s military planner several valuable lessons and
bears examination. Immediate lessons from the campaign were applied during Operation
OVERLORD five months after the landings at Anzio. The Allies had learned to send more
strength ashore in the initial landing and to drive inland immediately to certain key points. They
learned that a small force, once established on a beachhead, could survive in the face of severe
difficulty if properly supplied by logistic lifelines from the sea. Issues of poor communication
and C2 relating to combined forces were largely resolved. These are all important lessons for the
modern U.S. planner to note as virtually every operation in which U.S. forces will be involved in
the foreseeable future will involve coalition or alliance partners and take place within evertightening
fiscal constraints. As the Allies were forced to discover at Anzio, not sticking one’s
chin out too far may save an initial blow - but it can lead to catastrophic consequences if caution
turns invasion to attrition.