KASSERINE PASS
BATTLES
Doctrines and Lessons Learned
Volume II, Part 4
U.S. ARMY
CENTER OF MILITARY HISTORY
ontents
14. ombat ommand B, 1st Armored Division, Reports on ombat
Experience and Battle Lessons, 1943
15 . Tankers in Tunisia
16. German Tactical Doctrine, 1942
17. The German Armored Division (Extract), 1942
18. Provisional Instructions for Leadership and Action of the Tank
Regiment and Tank Battalion
14
ombat ommand B, 1 st Armored Division, Reports
on ombat Experience and Battle Lessons,
1943
HEADQUARTERS OMBAT OMFIAIJD "D" : OPY NO ., 20
1st US Irmored Division
APO 251 - U . S . Army
In the Field
10 June 1943
;UBJJ T : Reports on ombat Experience and BattleLessons for
0
: The ommanding General,' 1st US Armored Division .
I-TA TI AL DO TRINE
Generally speaking, the tactical doctrine as laid down by our field manuals
ias prover. to be sound . The weakness lies in the fact that during the high tempo
)f combat, and more especially so with, green and untried commands, a great many .
times elementary military teaching is forgotten or overlooked with the results that
nnecessary lives are . lost and often times the tide of battle turns with disastrous
-esults . This weakness is not necessarily confined to the troops actually engaged
.n combat but runs on up to higher headquarters .
IT TA TI AL TEA HING
In the Armored Force Field Manuals one obtains the idea from scanning the
:loverly designed sketches of "do's and dont's" of small unit-operations that it is
)esirable and proper for armor to attack anti-tank positions . Many sketches show
./aried methods of approach toward subduing an-AT gun . ( erience has proven, at
least in the Tunisian ampaign, that the AT gun is to be avoided as much as possible
'__d only attacked as a last resort . While the sketches are for the most part
orrect in the methods to be use under varied conditions still it should be more
strongly emphasized that .LT positions should be avoided by armor and only
~:~tacked when no other means of overcoming them is available . Instruction, before
-':.is command entered into actual combat, usually pre$ented the theoretical tacti-
`J1l situation to the platoon and even company commander with the problem of attack-
:4- and destroying an anti-tank position . It was up to him to .give a solution for
s situation . A false picture was here created and also a feeling of over-
'onfidence . In the initial stages of the operation cf this command in November
.,^d December, 1942, such over-confidence resulted in the rapid whittling down of a
,edium tank batta~ion to less than twenty tanks within a few minutes of actual
Z Dmbat, Another incidents Shortly afterward a platoon of .b1-4 replacement - t Vhk'
.ith new crews, upon being assigned a mission and given warning of the effect of
fire against the M-P tank, charged gloriously but vainly up a hill only to lose
;)ur out of five tanks from AT fire .
Talking to the platoon leader afterwards he truthfully explained that, one,
was confident that present enemy- AT guns were ineffective against the new M-4 t'
id, two, that his method of approach was based on an approved solution given under 0 .milar circumstances on maneuvers,
I D' 7
III ORGANIZATION OF A OMBAT OM ANA,
Under the n-osent set-up the staff of a combat command of an armored division
,.-snot function properly unless supplemented by additional staff officers . Should
.13- battalions be placed under the cbminand of a combat command without a regimen-
Training Purposes .
- 1 -
;_il headquarters these battalions will suffer in that certain of their .s taff offim.(
Irs, riamply an adjutant, personnel officer, an assistant . intelligence officer, a
apply officer, a motor officer and a surgeon, will, of a necessity, have to work
.1 the staff of the combat command which has none of-these key staff officers . The
ready small staff of a battalion is thereby weakened by the loss of one or more
its staff personnel and as a result the battalion is handicapped . On the other
ind when a regimental headquarters is placed under the command of the combat com-
-nd along with. other units, the regimental headquarters largely ceases to function
such, and thq regimental commander_ and certain members of his . staff, namely the
ritelligence officer, the executive officer, the operations officer, and the air
perations officer are without a job except as assistants to the combat command
taff or any other job given them by the combat commander .
In the Tunisian ampaign the tank regiment seldom, if ever, operated as such .
s the present trend appears to be the use of separate battalions, accordingly it
s believed that regiments should be disbanded and regimental staffs be incorporated
nto the combat commands thus giving the latter a complete working staff .
IV OFFENSIVE A TION
Throughout the entire Tunisian ampaign, offensive action by american troops
-s marked by the dispersal of effort, ht no time was a spearhead attack attempted
id the general fooling appeared to be one of fear of an enemy counter-attack . Itbelieved,
particularly in the latter stages of the campaign, that a concentration
effort upon a single objective rather than a coordinated drive with-all U .S.
.)mbat troops in the line would have resulted in the conclusion of the campaign
it more rapidly and with less loss of personnel and material . I step in the right
'Lrection towards this was the use of the lst armored 'Division, complete, in the
.nal stages_ of the battle east of Mateur .
On only one occasion, in February at Ousseltia Valley while under the French
th orps, did this command have sufficient infantry. But no sooner was the
:lion of driving the enemy from the valley completed than the infantry was
-^ved from this command by II U .S . orps order and the golden opportunity of
.ping the pass to Kairouan was lost . Furthermore at no time was armor, when
. .;(;3SS ful in making an advance as at Tebourba in December (while under the
.=tish V orps), Ousseltia in February, Kasserine in March, Maknassy in hpril,
.)wed up closely by infantry and its gains consolidated .
In the, employment of armor in the offensive, it is desirable to have the
"'a_try and artillery tear develop or detect soft spots in the enemy line and
t,,, n throw all available armor against these spots for a break-through . Once the
_rti•aK-through is accomplished, motorized infantry and plenty of it should quickly
!low up the advance of the armor . )
V THE DEFENSIVE
Two-thirds of the Tunisian ampaign was spent by Lmerican troops being on
defensive . It is well raolized that~ .,tho number of troops available to--
%quately hold in strength at all vital places was insufficient, but several
:knesses were noted which, if they had been rapidly corrected, would have
:"ovod the defensive strength of our lines immensely .
2 -
In moving about a battle-field, after its conclusion, it was always obvious
,There American troops had their positions due to' the fact that the "digging in"
differed from that of the enemy . Masters of the art are the Germans and every
position held for any length of time whatsoever is pock-marked with dugouts or
foxholes for the men and excavations for the 88mm guns and other field pieces .
given the airfields of the enemy show the "digging in" theory . Wherever possible,
bomb shelters were built for the planes . No such shelters were ever noticed
on our own fields . It is absolutely necessary that all troops be impressed with
the "digging in" practice as many lives will be saved and troops, especially
infantry and AT personnel may undergo severe artillery fire and even be over-run
bby tanks without suffering undue losses and still be able to carry on the battle .
- shallow slit trench means an early grave, and a poorly dug in AT gun means
a weapon and crew lost .
oncealment is neglected in most cases . American troops in particular are
prone to use the skyline for a vantage point . In a great many cases officers are
even worse offenders than the men and staff officers in particular are prone to
"have a look at things" while standing on the crest of a ridge .
Main positions are disclosed to enemy aircraft and even enemy OP's by movement
lighting of fire (British and French troops are even worse offenders than Americans
on this point), hanging out washing, reflectors (windshields ; tin cans, otc .)
and all other things basic training insists not be done . In conjunction with the
prevention of this, the aim should be to have alternative positions and only move
to battle positions when the' com :aanding officer feels the time is right .
Anti-tank mines were not used to their fullest advantage . ( ounter-attack by
enemy, tanks is always a chief danger after the capture of a position. The remedy
for this is the rapid organizationof AT defense and the laying of minefields as
quickly as possibla,
r
In connection with an enemy tank attack, there is a general feeling among-the
_oo,L)s that the 37mm__,mun is , .pot a goodanTi-tank wea pn . uue_Tolackof confidence
troops ara promo have a fooling o_ inse" ^ur'
S ~~ chis always bad for those on
she defensive . It is most certainly desirable that a heavier caliber, lower
silhouette AT weapon be provided . _
Under any conditions reconnaissance and observation posts are vital. Through-
Dut the Tunisian ampaign, the front line was, for the most, a loosely held
,eneral line and in such a situation OP's play an extremely important role . Unfortunately,
reconnaissance by ground troops was usually not aggressive enough and
,oconnaissance by air almost always valueless . This latter was due to the fact
--_at up until, the time the enemy was on the run, alll his movements took place a night (we never had any night reconnaissance flights) or if something was
; potted during the day,, the' reports of .this failed to reach units that ;tore
-oncerned .
Observation posts :were widely used by the French and English and obviously by
he enemy . Toward. the latter stages of the . campaign, their use and advantages
)egan to- be more fully realized by- us . Even then, however, aside from artillery
orward observcrs, .personnel manning OP's were not impressed with the full extent
l their duties . It is mandatory that everyone within the command have a knowledge
f what to look for, record and report -while on OP duty . There should be specilly
trained men in each outfit for-this work ., As the German is mostly a
:reature of -habit, invaluable information may be obtained from the proper use of
;P's .
- 3 -
V1 LIAISON
Liaison between major units was often times lacking . This command, for
over half the ca.,ipaign, acted more or less as an independent unit and in many
instances had little ; if any, knowledge of exactly what was taking place or the
contemplated actions by adjacent commands . Our liaison officers found that the
British and the French were most cooperative but in some instances information
as difficult to get from American units . Mutual .liaison always existed between
our own command and the British and French but often times American commands
failed to establish it with this command . In the latter stages of the campaign,
however, this situation improved enormously . It must be stressed that liaison
is not only necessary but vital and' there can never be too much of it between units .
VII EMPLOYM N1 UNDER OMMAND OF 11 DIFPN:RENT NATIONALITY
It is recommended that no unit smaller than a division be employed under
command of a different nationality . - Each army has its own peculiar system of
training and employment of units as well as the use of equipment . The result of
attaching small units under foreign command results in the feeling of personnel
involved that their equipment and organization is being used improperly . The inevitable
is that a feeling of mistrust and lack of confidence springs up and
naturally every effort must be taken to avoid such a feeling if we are to continue
to be successful . It might also be added that communication and supply problems
-re also yet another difficulty in such a situation .
VIII OOPERATION BY SUPPORT MM OBSERV:ITION AVIATION
In the initial part of the campaign, close support aviation was completely
lacking. Only one instance of close support is known to exist up to the latter
)art of January 1943 . This occurred in the vicinity of Massicault on December 10,
L942 . :: flight of Spitfires (British) attacked and caused the withdrawal of some
_fifteen to twenty enemy tanks massing for an attack . The next example of close
support ectv-r_ed in hisseltia Valley the latter part of January when a prearranged
plan w7ith the 12th U .S . Air Support ontrol of marking a target with
Smoke for air bombardment proved highly successful. From that time on close
support increased and reached its n .ximum in thi battle of the Kasserine Valley
(actually the Bahiret Foussane Valley) around'F,bruary 24, 1943 . Here, in
:onjunction with our artillery, B-25's, B-17's,t-20's and all types of pursuit
ships played- a major part in stopping and finally routing the enemy. After this,
:lose support missions were most difficult to obtain as apparently the tactical
tir force had put into being a plan which minimized close support missions
-equested by ground troops .
-~
Aerial observation, as far as helping this command to know Ahe where®bout§
_nd movements of the enemy, must be considered worthless up unti the latter part
)f Lpril. At this time the enemy,' being in full retreat, was moving both day
tnd night and reports as to his whereabouts began to flow in . On the other hand,
'oquests for aerial observation on certain definite localities were, even then, for
tie most, almost certain to be refused and if granted of little value due, one, the
ongth of time required to get report back to requesti'ng'headquarters and, two, the
ack of trained observers and observation planes .
!"t-no; time were night reconnaissance flights made on request and to the best
f the knowledge of this command, were not ever attempted .
It is firmly believed that mutual liaison between ground and air must be
improved down to and including a combat command especially when it is acting in a
separate capacity .
ooperation between ground and air increased as the campaign progressed but
much greater progress is needed . Among the many improvements, too numerous to
mention here, one simple and easily carried out plan could be accomplished . The
air support control should send senior officers to visit front line positions
and get the version of division and combat commanders actually engaged in fighting
as to the improvement of air support in their sector . As each sector presents a
different problem, spot solutions could be made and both ground and air would
benefit in their relations and the close support rendered would undoubtedly be
vastly improved .
Briefly summarizing steps to be taken to improve close support aviation, the
follo-Ang points are mentioned for consideratign :
a . Each armored division should have attached one observation squadron
and one fighter-bomber squadron .
b . A senior flying officerr should be on the staff of each division to
idvise the division commander on the capabilities and limitations of aircraft -
.vail.able and also on all other air data .
c . Division Headquarters and the two ombat ommands should have
Dernamently attached air support parties . These parties not only should act as
:hannels for air requests but also a source of all air reconnaissance information .
d .
definite policy (something not in e -~dstenco in the Tunisian
J~mpaign) of air-ground radio communication and air support requests should be used
e . !, system-of air to ground and ground to air recognition signals should
)e in effect throughout the combat zone .
IX PYROTE HNI S
Throughout the entire campaign the enemy made extensive use of pyrotechnics
end it was only in the late stages that their use came into even partial play by
.merican troops . Both French and British troops, especially the British Eighth
.rmy, also used this means of signalling . It is felt that pyrotechnics should
)o used in any future operation much more extensively and more emphasis placed
)n this phase in the training periods . On the occasions this command used this
system it was most effective . Its harassing effect, even on seasoned troops,
)roved very great .
X DEMOLITION KITS
On numerous occasions, especially in the withdrawal from the Sbeitla - Gafsa'
1r.a, the enemy was able to move rapidly in pursuit As little or no demolitioh was
xocuted on bridges, cculverts, defiles, etc . It-as .
, ~-
,
d~e~,ieved that at least one
-enolition kit of the cavalry type be an integral part of at least-ohe in every
Three armored vehicles .
5
l
In connection with this it is .also deemed highly desirable that every vehicle
be equipped with some sort of a charge whereby a vehicle can quickly -be rendered
useless when it becomes necessary to abandon it . At the" close of the cari'paign
the enemy had in his possession scores of American vehicles, the majority of which
r.ould never have been able to be used had these vehicles been equipped with some
sort of a destroying charge .
XI MAPS X
Both British and American troop were severely handicapped throughout the
/campaign by the lack of- good maps . The French had only a very limited supply
of excellent maps of the country, On the other hand the enemy apparently had an
unlimited amount of these good maps and greatly profited by thorn .
The maps we used were not only faulty in showing existing road nets but the
reproduction of the original excellent French map was so poor as to be of very
little value . Towards the latter part of -the campaign the situation improved
end new and better reproductions were finally obtained .
It is felt, howevor, that in any future campaign an adequate supply of good
laps be ready for use upon demand .
For the ommanding Officer :
E . A . RUSSELL, Jr .,
Lt . ol ., avalry,
%FFI IILL :
Executive .
~sf D . D . KLOUS,
D . D . KLOUS,
apt ., avalry,
S
=:?RODU ED BY G-3SE TION,}DQUARTERS, IST ARMOREDDIVISION, 30 JUNE,1943 .
15
Tankers in Tunisia
HEADQUARTERS
ARMORED REPLA EMENT TRAINING ENTER
Subject : What American Tankers have learned in battle .
From . Armored soldiers at the front in Tunisia .
To
Men of the Armored Replacement Training enter.
Armored soldiers at the front in Tunisia are trying to help you by what they say in
these pages . Many of them answered this question : "What have you learned that will help
a younger brother just entering the Replacement enter at Fort Knox?" They told these stories
to BRIGADIER GENERAL T. J . AMP, my assistant, at the front in Tunisia the first half of
April, when the going was hard .
LIEUTENANT GENERAL DEVERS, at that time hief of the Armored Force, included in
his order to GENERAL AMP, "Get first-hand information . Get the story at the front. Go to
the enlisted man . See what he knows ." I ordered him, "Find out if our replacements are in
condition and are trained right for battle . heck them all the way from General Headquarters
to the units and from the gang plank to the battlefield ." Army Ground Forces also
gave him a broad mission and GENERAL EISENHOWER appointed him his personal representative
. GENERAL AMP visited all American Armored Units in North Africa which had been
in action up to that time.
The talks were informal, occasionally the enemy interrupted . No one had a chance to
see the record of his talk, usually he didn't know the conversation was being written down in
longhand.
The men who talk to you in this book won the hard way ; heart and soul they hope
you will learn from them how to win easier than they did . You had better learn now to kill
or be killed or else you'll learn the hard way in battle .
Fort Knox, Kentucky
31 Jul y 1943
. L. S OTT
Major General, U. S. Army,
ommanding
American Tankers on a captured German Mark III Tank
Only the Army has gasoline in North Africa
it
T.4 -8L E
OF
O.N YEN T 5
Pug s
III
1 . FOREWORD by Major General . L . Scott 1
2 . MAP OF TUNISIA showing all places mentioned VI
3 . INTRODU TION by Brigadier General T . J . amp 1
4. Sergeant R . DuHamel, Headquarters ompany, 3rd Battalion, 60th Infantry,
-Djebel bou Douaou, 3 April 1943 13
5. olonel Stack, ommanding the 6th Armored Infantry, 14 April 1943 14
6. Sergeant William Keith, ompany "G", 6th Armored Infantry, Maknassy,
5 April 1943 14
7. Sergeant William T . Etritge, ompany "I", 6th Armored Infantry, Maknassy,
5 April 1943 14
8. Sergeant Leland A. Sutherland, ompany "G", 6th Armored Infantry,
Maknassy, 5 April-1943 16
9. Staff Sergeant Seaborn Duckett, 6th Armored Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943____ 17
10 . Private Jack Moore, ompany "L", 60th Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943 17
11 . aptain Gail H . Brown, 60th Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943 18
12. Lieutenant olonel L. V. Hightower, Executive Officer, 1st Armored Regiment
1st Armored Division, 1 March 1943 19
13. Lieutenant H . F. Hillenmeyer, ompany "H", 1st Armored Regiment, 1st Armored
Division, 1 March 1943 24
14. Sergeant Baskem Bennett, ompany "H", 1st Armored Regiment, 1st Armored
Division, 1 March 1943 25
15. Sergeant James H. Bowser, ompany "H", 1st Armored Regiment, 1st Armored
Division, 1 March 1943 27
16. Sergeant Swatzlander, ompany "I", 1st Armored Regiment, 1st Armored Division,
Maknassy, 4 April 1943 28
17. Sergeant Becker, ompany "G", 1st Armored Regiment, 1st Armored Division,
18.
Maknassy, 4 April 1943 28
Sergeant Sipes, ompany "G", 1st Armored Regiment 29
19. Staff Sergeant Kermit Jackson, ompany "D", 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 31
20. Sergeant Decker, ompany "D", 1st Armored Regiment, Krerouf, 11 April 1943____ 32
21 . Lieutenant Lasell, ompany "D", 1st Armored Regiment, Krerouf, 11 April 1943____ 32
22. Lieutenant Mc racken, 2nd Battalion, 1st Armored Regiment, Krerouf,
11 April 1943 32
23. Lieutenant Boresh, ommanding Officer, ompany "E", 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 32
24. Lieutenant Parker, 2nd Battalion, 1st Armored Regiment, Reconnaissance Officer,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 33
25. Staff Sergeant William Hagler, ompany "E", 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 33
TA 8LE OF ONTENTS
26.
27.
28 .
29.
30.
31 .
32. Lieutenant olonel Ringsok, 6th Armored Infantry, 14 April 1943 40
33. Sergeant Frank Sabin, Headquarters ompany, 2nd Battalion, 6th Armored Infantry,
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
6th Armored Infantry 47
40. Private Blair H . anard, 6th Armored Infantry 47
41 . Sergeant Norman Ann-enberg, Battalion Headquarters, 3rd Battalion, 6th Armored
Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943 47
42. Lieutenant William S. Norman, ompany "H", 3rd Battalion, 13th Armored Regiment,
near Sidi bou Zid, 14 April 1943 48
43. Staff Sergeant Wilbur R . White, ompany "H", 13th Armored Regiment 49
44. Staff Sergeant Lewis Shelton, ompany "I", 13th Armored Regiment . 50
45. Lieutenant George Dempsey, ompany "I", 13th Armored Regiment, near
Sidi bou Zid, .19 April 1943 50
46. Lieutenant olonel Louis A. Hammock, 751st Tank Battalion (M), Fondouk,
47.
48 .
49.
IV
Page
Private Habar, Headquarters ompany, 1st Armored Regiment, Krerouf,
11 April 1943 34
aptain A . R . Moore, ompany "F", 1st Armored Regiment, Krerouf,
11 April 1943 35
Lieutenant Harry T. Holtzman, ompany "D", 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 35 .
Sergeant Lasley, ompany "G", 1st Armored Regiment, Maknassy,
4 April 1943 37
Sergeant Neal, ompany "I", 3rd Battalion, 1st Armored Regiment,
Maknassy, 4 April 1943 39
Sergeant Butler, ompany "1", 1st Armored Regiment, Maknassy, 4 April 1943 40
14 April 1943 41
Sergeant George leland, ompany "D", 6th Armored Infantry, near Sidi bou Zid,
14 April 1943 42
Sergeant John D. Mahoney, Headquarters ompany, 2nd Battalion, 6th Armored
Infantry, 14 April 1943 43
Lieutenant Kenneth D. Warren, Headquarters ompany, 2nd Battalion, 6th Armored
Infantry 43
Sergeant Pudimat, ompany "E", 6th Armored Infantry, Sidi bou Zid,
14 April 1943 44
aptain Lawrence Pugh, ompany "D"; 6th Armored Infantry, near Sidi bou Zid,
14 April 1943 44
Staff Sergeant Fred W. Erdwins, Headquarters Detachq ent, 2nd Battalion,
13 April 1943 . 50
Lieutenant Thomas B. Rutledge, 751st Tank Battalion (M), Fondouk,
12 April 1943 52
Private James Pasek, ompany "A", 751st Tank Battalion (M), near Fondouk,
12 April 1943 54
orporal Stephen J . Siracusa, ompany "B", 751st Tank Battalion (M),
near Fondouk, 12 April 1943 . 54
TA 8LE OF ONTENTS
Page
50. Private Raymond hristy, ompany " ", 751st Tank Battalion - (M), near
Fondouk, 12 April 1943 55
51 . Lieutenant olonel McPheeters, ommanding 91st Armored Field Artillery
Battalion, 1st Armored Division, near Lessouda, 17 April 1943 55
52. A British General Officer of the widest tank experience, Tunisia, 16 April 1943 56
53. aptain Henry . Tipton, Parachute Infantry, Aide to Brigadier General T . J . amp,
Krerouf, 10 April 1943 . Log of Advance by ombat ommand "A" of the
1st Armored Division 57
54. Index s 61
- Krerouf, 11 April 1943 60
°These pictures were taken by a North African Replacement enter.
V
Name
Page
1 . American Tankers on a captured German Mark III Tank* II
2 . Only the Army has gasoline in North Africa II
3 . Map of Tunisia showing all places mentioned VI
4. aptured German Mark 11 Tank now used in training at a North African
5 .
Replacement enter*
Outpost on Djebel bou Dovaou - 3 April 1943 12 ^TYTl:2
6 . Side view of the German 88-mm Gun* 20
7 . View of a German Mark VI Tank with its 88-mm gun turned to the rear*_-_- 23
8 . Front View of a German Mark II Tank and an American M5 Tank* 26
9 . Front View of a German Mark III Tank and an American M4 Tank* 29
10. M10 TD emplacement looking toward Faid Pass . This TD crew had worked
11 .
day and night to dig two such emplacements in the stony soil 34
What a German Mark Ill Tank looks like against the background of North African
12.
terrain* 38
This hospital was less than 30 minutes from the front 46
13. The camouflaged German antitank gun put out of action by Lieutenant Rutledge 52
14. ontact near Fondouk, 10 April 1943, between a peep of the 34th Infantry
15.
Division and a scout car of ombat ommand "A" of the 1st Armored Division____ 58
General amp, some of the Africa orps prisoners and General McQuillan
VI
7ANxEs JQ/N 7l/N/5 /4
INTRODU TION
In this book you will not find the "big picture" of the North African campaign, but
you will find the little tricks that saved the lives of fighting men and that may save yours.
These men won victory, and you can win if you will do what they tell you .
You ought to feel exceptionally good about one thing-the people in Africa who
knew said that the armored replacements had received the training necessary for victorious
fighting and were the tops of all American replacements .
You should get ready for battle here . Let SERGEANT DuHAMEL of the 60th Infantry,
from an outpost on a mountain peak in Tunisia, tell you in his own words how soon a replacement
may be fighting.
"I was sent as a replacement . I sailed from New York 5th March; landed in Oran
19th March ; sailed from Oran 21st March ; arrived Phillipeville night of 24th March; left
Phillipeville by truck 25th March; arrived at a post near onstantine 25th March ; left 26th
March; arrived Ain Beida 27th March; left Ain Beida 31st March ; arrived 9th Division 31st
March; was on outpost this mountain 1st April . I am one of one hundred replacements of
the 60th Infantry who are on this section of the mountain range ."
(See Page 13) °
Six places in less than a month! Direct from New York to a fighting post in Africa
from which the enemy was repulsed by hand-to-hand fighting in a night attack on 4 April,
the day after this talk . That is how close some of us are to the front.
The outstanding point from all statements was the need for exact discipline . The
private soldier felt the need of this discipline, as did the officer, because it meant that he
could be sure that the other fellow was doing his part. All through the pages you will read
stories which will tell you this.
GENERAL EISENHOWER said, "Discipline is vital . A possible 50% improvement in value
of men results from making them tough and well disciplined . See that orders are carried out
exactly. We need exactness , in uniform and in saluting. Great nervous energy is required
of commanders . They must meet requirements and exact discipline and obedience."
GENERAL HUEBNER said, "Discipline is vital . The most important command is right
face, that is, to have a thing done at once, immediately ."
GENERAL SAWBRIDGE went a little further -he paid a tribute to armored replacements
and then said, "Replacements generally lack fundamental discipline . They have not
learned initiative or to act for themselves . They wait for a non-commissioned officer."
You should think about this ; discipline means more than just obeying direct orders, it
means doing what you ought to do without orders. The ability to rely on the other men in
*NOTE: The number given below each quotation is the number of the page in this book where the
full statement, from which the quotation has been taken, may be found .
1
T N K e R 5 1 N TU N 1 5 1 A
your company and on the men of all the companies of all the arms that arc working with
your company to do what they ought to do is what wins victories and costs the enemy lives.
Physical fitness, maintenat%ce of equipment, skill in arms, are important; but above
them all is that discipline which makes it possible for each man to depend with safety on all
his comrades.
In the modest accounts that follow are stories of the highest heroism . Often you will
have to look closely to see how well these men have done . In years to come you will find
that many of the men in this book will have won fame for their deeds, for the deeds of which
they tell only those parts which they think will be of help to you .
You will learn here of the tanks that burned, of men who were killed, but remember,
the enemy paid a high price for them-they paid with the "unconditional surrender" of all of
North Africa, with hundreds of thousands of prisoners, and with abandoned equipment that
hasn't yet all been counted .
The stories told here were told at the front wherever armored troops were found .
LEADERSHIP
Platoon leaders learned in the North Africa fighting that to lead, you've got to be out
in front. LIEUTENANT HILLENMEYER of company "H", 1st Armored Regiment, said, "As a platoon
leader, I learned that you've just got to lead your men . When you get out in front, they'll follow
you easily. If you're moving in sections, the platoon leader must go in the forward section .
And what's almost as important is the fact that every man must know what's going on . You've
got to take them into your confidence and explain the show to them . They'll always respond
with better fighting."
(See Page 24)
SERGEANT BE KER of the 1st Armored Regiment told me, 2nd I quote : "It's a funny
thing, being tank commander. You have got to run the crew, be stern, and show leadership . I
had a new driver -for an M3 tank . I told him to drive up a slope to a certain place and
then stop . He got excited and went all the way up the hill . I told him to back up to the right
place. He got excited again and went all the way back down the hill . He wouldn't listen to
the inter-phone communication so I hollered to the 37 gunner to stop him, as I had my head out .
Finally we stopped him and we drove up to a safe firing place and I asked him why he didn't
pay attention to me. Over night, I explained how I wanted him to drive and how I wanted him
to pay attention, and I told him if he didn't I would close his slot up completely and make
him drive blind. That fixed him . I think I have a good driver now."
(See Page 28)
I was also told of how PRIVATE MOORE, ompany "L", 6th Infantry, led a charge of 20
men to recapture a hill from which his company had been driven . PRIVATE MOORE, through
*NOTE: Also see pages 21 and 46 . These accounts do not agree and should not agree because all
grades must exercise initiative and the application of principles varies according to circumstances .
2
/N rROOV r/oN
his own leadership, in the absence of any commissioned or noncommissioned officer, gathered
together a group of men and charged the hill, all standing up with the exception of two men
who crawled up, one to throw hand grenades into a machine gun nest and the other to shoot
the enemy when they came out.
LIEUTENANT OLONEL RINGSOK told me : "Frankness with your subordinate leaders is
the biggest thing in leadership . The officer should be truthful . If he doesn't know, he should
admit to the noncommissioned officers that he doesn't know all the answers and that they
must work it out together . You can't impress the organization of the battalion too much in
the States . Let them learn it there rather than have to learn it here, for it is absolutely necessary
that-the men know the workings of a unit when leaders turn up missing in action and subordinates
take their places ."
(See Page 40)
Vft . RE ONNAISSAN E
"A reconnaissance of the field, if you are lucky enough to be able to make it, is the
most important thing I can think of," LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER told me . "In tank
fighting nothing is more important than expert reconnaissance of your routes of advance and
withdrawal. Several times both we and the Germans have moved up on what we thought was
a good clear route only to find a dry wash, nine or ten feet high, blocking our way, causing
us to withdraw ."
(See Page 19)
LIEUTENANT HILLENMEYER, also of the 1sf Armored Regiment, said, "Sir, if we're going
to get anywhere, we must put greater emphasis on good reconnaissance . I know of one
instance where we went into battle not knowing what was there . We saw the enemy tanks
go into Faid Pass and that night we had a dry run back in our concentration area . Next
day when the attack came off we found the thing was a blind-the pass was covered with
deadly antitank stuff . It plastered our one company that went in ."
(See Page 24)
STAFF SERGEANT' WILLIAM HAGLER of ompany "E", 1st Armored Regiment, related
this incident to me : "At Medjes-el-Bab there was little or no reconnaissance. Our infantry attacked
in the morning . One platoon of tanks was supposed to follow the right flank, and it was
supposed to be protected by another platoon . We had no reconnaissance other than our own
on foot . We walked the tanks in. We had no orders other than to await a tank attack . The
following morning about 0900 hours, we lost two tanks to the 88-mm guns . The first was the
command tank . I went forward to get the crew and lost my tank by three 88-mm gun hits.
Subsequently the entire command tank crew was lost by mortar fire. I was wounded and
taken to the rear. I am confident that reconnaissance would have saved those two tanks . The
light tanks followed us around ."
(See Page 33)
3
I
T NK E#Q5 /N T!/N/5 /A
LIEUTENANT Mc RA KEN of the 1st Armored Regiment told me, "Everyone thought
Sergeant Jackson's buddy, Sergeant Hamner, was cracked when he remarked that he saw a
building moving around . But it was a German gun position . They are very smart and
use houses, sand dunes, or hay stacks as gun positions . The moving building turned out to
be a vehicle with windows painted on representing windows of a house ."
(See Page 32)
However, it was SERGEANT FRANK SABIN, of Headquarters ompany, 6th Armored
Infantry, who really summed up the whole subject of reconnaissance when he said, "The battalion
commanding officer and the commanding officers of the companies do better when they
make reconnaissance. Seems like the battalion does 100% better when they do ."
(See Page 41)
aft
TANK TA TI S
In discussing tank tactics with LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER, I was told, "Generally
they (the Germans) try to suck you into an antitank gun trap. Their light tanks will
bait you in by playing around just outside effective range. When you start after them, they
turn tail and draw you in within range of their 88-mm guns . First they open up on you with
their guns in depth . Then when you try to flank them you find yourself under fire of carefully
concealed guns at a shorter range. We've just got to learnn to pick those guns up before
closing in on them ."
(See Page 19)
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER then added, "Take it very slowly . Germans do it
that way all the time. Do not shift gears once you start, particularly in the dusk, because the
backfires will give you away . Keep the tanks out of column at all times . Never travel in
column, travel in `V', line, wedge, but never in column. Stay off the roads . Get off the roads
and never use them. In this country, too, we've learned to move slowly so as not to reveal
our position . You can't boil up to battle at high speed without broadcasting your coming in
a bigcloud of dust."
(See Page 19)
LIEUTENANT THOMAS B. RUTLEDGE of the 751st Tank Battalion said, "One thing I
learned : the next time we move up, before we close up on the objective, it is a good thing to look
down on the ground in front of the objective and if you see anything that looks like the enemy
or enemy guns, fire away at it with canister . We were so close that with keen observation, even
two or three rounds or some machine gun fire would have downed many machine guns. I believe
this would save us a lot of grief afterwards . We know there are lots of mines, but
when approaching the objective we seem to forget those machine guns . So, instead of covering
4
/ N T R O D !/
r / O N
the ground in front of the. objective with machine gun fire, we thought only of the objective,
which was on the hill ."
(Sec Pagc 52)
SERGEANT LASLEY of the 1st Armored Regiment, who had been a tank commander for
eleven months and had been in several actions, told me, "When you are fired upon, if you have
a good tank like an M4, you try to find out where the enemy is and fire even before you find
a good position. Of course, it is best to get under cover as soon as you can . You should go
from one firing position to another as a platoon . But at times, we must go on our own. Some
times you must act on your own because you can see the ground that you are going on better
than the platoon leader . The driver and assistant driver should assist in picking our targets .
They call be on the alert and pick out targets that the gunners can't see."
(Sec Page 37)
Tactics as practiced by SERGEANT BUTLER'S platoon, of ompany "I" of the 1st Armored
Regiment, was to have one section of the platoon advance while the other section covered
it. He said, "One must act on his own a great deal of the time . You can't wait to be told
when to fire or where to fire. When you see something which you think worth firing upon,
take the chance. The function of the officer is to keep the men together and tell them what is
going on. The soldier has to use his individual judgment ."
"You should keep your troops on the alert always, ready for quick movement," SERGEANT
BUTLER added as an afterthought .
(See Page 40)
TANK GUNNERY
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER, in talking about our armored tank gunnery,
said, "Bore sight to beat hell but don't let the boys try to do it at 1000 yards so the axis
of sight and tube coincide, because when you are shooting at 6000 yards there is no telling
where it will hit . Keep your sights parallel . Bore sight on a distant object ; the more distant
the more effective."
(See Page 19)
Listen to what SERGEANT JAMES H . BOWSER of the 1st Armored Regiment says about
gunnery: "The gunnery instruction they gave us in the States was good . No sir, I wouldn't
change it . There's just one thing you must remember when you're fighting Germans . When
you shoot at them they stop and try to kid you into thinking you knocked them out . Then
when you turn your back on them, they open up again. Sir, we shoot until they stop and then
keep shooting until they burn up . It's a good idea, too, to check your ammunition closely .
Once I had to climb out of a tank during an action to ram a bent shell case out of my gun
and then hurry back in before the machine guns got me ."
(See Page 27)
5
T N K E R S / N ;re/ N/ 5 / 4
TANK MAINTENAN E
In tank fighting, one of the most important things is to keep your tank and its weapons
in good condition . In many cases you will be on your own, a long way from any maintenance
equipment . As LIEUTENANT NORMAN of the 1st Armored Regiment told me, "You
don't get a Goddam thing done to the tanks unless you do it yourself-and don't delay doing
it. Bring lots of brushes to clean the guns ."
STAFF SERGEANT WILBUR R. WHITE of the 13th Armored Regiment said, "When
full maintenance is not available, look out for certain things : battery, water, keep check on
control boxes in turret."
He added, "The night before this attack (at El Guettar) started, our M3 threw a
track. SERGEANT McVEY and I put it back with the tools we had on the tank . The captain
complimented us because if the tank had been left, Jerry would have shelled it when daylight
came."
(See Page 49)
INDIVIDUAL PROTE TION
OLONEL HAINES, ommanding Officer of the 1st Armored Regiment, told me a story
of the difficulty he had had for a while getting one soldier to wear his helmet . The soldier
had claimed that it was too heavy . But the other day the soldier came to OLONEL HAINES
and said, "I'll never be without this helmet again . You will never have trouble getting me to
wear it."
When OLONEL HAINES asked him why, the soldier showed him the helmet and said,
"See this dent! Just look at it!"
(See Page 30)
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER told me, "Although we've knocked down several
enemy aircraft we find that our men are having trouble with their leads . You've got to shoot
planes as you would ducks . The big fault with our antiaircraft fire is that about 60% of it
does not have enough lead. Our boys don't seem to realize the speed of those ships . The .50
caliber machine guns, however, will keep them high. German pilots seem to despise the stuff ."
(See Page 19)
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER then added, "We've also learned that it's important
for everyone to know what to do with wounds, especially shock . Although 1 saw one man die
6
/NTROoU TION
of shock from a simple hand wound, I've also seen our men save almost 500 casualties by
prompt treatment of their wounds with sulpha drugs and proper treatment for shock . Most of
the sulpha drugs are administered by the men themselves . A couple of weeks ago one of my
sergeants fixed up a man who had been severely wounded on the head and neck when he
was blown off a tank. Today, the man is back in action ."
(See Page 19)
STAFF SERGEANT WILBUR R. WHITE said, "When under artillery fire, stay in your tank
-it's better than any foxhole." LIEUTENANT HOLTZMAN showed that he agreed with SERGEANT
WHITE when he said, "The tank is the best slit trench in the world when shells or bombs are
falling . I feel safe in it and stick close to it at all times ."
(See Pages 49 and 35)
SERGEANT JOHN T. MAHONEY expressed his views as to personal security by saying,
"In a bombing attack, don't try to run too far from your half-track . Go about 20 . or 30 yards
and then hit the dirt."
(See Page 43)
SERGEANT FRANK SABIN said, "Dig good foxholes . We learned in Sbeitla Valley that
foxholes offered smaller area and less chance of getting hit by bombs and shrapnel ."
(See Page 41)
LIEUTENANT THOMAS B. RUTLEDGE told me the following incident : "I gave the order
to abandon (the tank) to the right because the gun was on the left . As we opened the door,
machine gun fire started. I went to the front of the tank to see where it was coming from,
and it was coming from both sides . We flattened out and started crawling. I stayed behind
the rest with a Tommy gun. The driver was leading. One of those guns saw us and when
one man raised up it hit him in the tail, and another man was hit in the back and another in
the shoulder. Immediately I ordered everyone to freeze themselves flat to the ground."
(See Page 52)
SERGEANT DuHAMEL of the 60th Infantry told me, "We moved up into the hills here
night before last . Yesterday I got permission to go out scouting, and took a man with me .
"Today I came alone and didn't tell them I was coming, because I didn't want one of those
other men with me. It was because the men on patrol exposed themselves so much that I
went off alone today. The commanding officer of the other company up where I am, a second
lieutenant, I overheard saying he wanted to get away from this new group because they
exposed themselves so much ."°
(See Page 13)
SERGEANT WILLIAM T. ETRITGE of the 6th Armored Infantry had this to say : "Three
main things that I think are important : the first is to keep your weapons clean-they won't
fire if you don't. Stay under cover. I have had men who were not under cover and they
haven't come back . Then get all the fire on the enemy that you can . It is best to keep very
*NOTE : On another occasion I was told the story of an American patrol of 12 men who were heard
talking while out in front . They never reported back .-TJ
7
k
T #V 14
E R 5 /N 7€,N/5 /4
quiet. At any time at night whenever you make a slight noise the enemy immediately opens
up with machine gun fire and mortars."
(See Page 14)
"You can find anti-personnel mines if you watch closely as you go along . You can see the
three prongs sticking out . About seven pounds of pressure will set them off . We have taken
them out and put the pins back ."
SERGEANT LELAND A. SUTHERLAND also confirmed the need to keep down when he
said, "The scouts drew enemy fire . All the machine guns fired and the men had to learn one
thing-that was to stay down. I lost three men . I can harp and preach but the men won't
get down. I have learned that artillery couldn't hurt you if you just got down in a foxhole
while the firing was going on ."
"I have no experiences to relate, but have had the hell scared out of me here for a
month or so. I have learned that we have to play for keeps . I think that my men are getting
smarter now. In our company we have not got many replacements . We got sixteen last
night. Everyone felt good to get them . I put my best men with them, I picked a good old
man for each new man . The old man showed the new one just how to dig his foxhole and
told him everything . We were sorry they were mostly from ooks' and Bakers' School . We
need riflemen."
(See Page 16)
STAFF SERGEANT SEABORN DU KETT of the 6th Armored Infantry wanted me to tell you
this : "The first thing is to keep your head and have good concealment . Keep your eyes open
because the Germans are pretty smart and you have to keep awake to get them . At Kasserine
Pass I know we lost some men by going to sleep . You got to be awake all the time .°
We lost men by wanting to go to sleep . They seem to get the idea that they should have rest
more than anything else. They don&t . get scared until it's too late .
"Up at Kasserine Pass a man didn't carry out orders that he should have, orders to
move to the top of the mountain, and some of those that went to sleep didn't come out . It is
necessary to obey orders ."
(See Page 17)
PRIVATE JA K MOORE of the 60th Infantry, who led the charge I have already referred
to, had this to say, "It seems like everything the enemy uses is designed to harrass a
man. They start firing at night and the guns seem to crack overhead, and it makes it seem
as if they were right on top of you . The tracers seem to have curves on them . But if you
wait, and take it easy, you can soon tell where they are. They have snipers that don't have
much of a chance of hitting anything but scare the hell out of you . I am not afraid of it
now anymore but last Monday we took a pretty good beating from their artillery . It was our
second attack, and many men were pretty scared, but you readily realize that if you are in
the ground it is pretty ineffective ."
(See Page 17)
°NOTE: Another story of guards not being alert to investigate noise or trouble : Eight Italians came
into an American position, killed two officers and four men, and captured six men . This incident was later
reported to higher headquarters as an attack by forty enemy tanks .
8
/N T JQ O D (/ r / O N
STAFF SERGEANT FRED W. ERDWINS of the 6th Armored Infantry told me, "1 have never
seen a man killed in a slit trench, but I did see three men killed who did not start in digging as
the others did . Entrenching tools are very valuable and almost as necessary as a man's arms ."
(See Page 47)
PRIVATE BLAIR H . ONARD, 6th Armored Infantry, said : "In this war there is no front.
The enemy may come from the rear as the enemy tanks did to my company . We saw the tanks
at the rear, but thought they were our own . One half hour later they moved up and shot
hell out of our half-tracks ."
(See Page 47)
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM S. NORMAN, 13th Armored Regiment, suggested, "In training,
get recruits used to sound of artillery shells. Many men shiver and shake and are terrified
of artillery fire. But remember when you hear the `freight trains' coming, most of them aren't
coining anywhere near you." Then he added, "The most important lesson is not to worry .
Respect Jerry, but don't worry ."
(See Page 48)
A
TRAINING
Many men offered suggestions for increasing the efficiency of the basic training they
had taken here at Fort Knox . I mention a few of them here to show how these battle scarred
veterans are thinking .
When I spoke with SERGEANT SWATZLANDER of the 1st Armored Regiment, he said
to me, "Sir, if I had a brother coming in combati .I would want him to know well the functioning
of the tank and all its guns . I would want him to know personal care-just how long to
stay with a damaged tank before leaving it . After it has been hit it is a big fire hazard . You
stay as long as you can . If you have to leave, you do it quickly ."
(See Page 28)
When I asked SERGEANT HAGLER of the 1st Armored Regiment what was the most
important thing for a tanker to know, he answered, "Everything . Every man must know his job
and the tank commander must know them all ."
(See Page 33)
LIEUTENANT HOLTZMAN suggested to me, "Try to arouse interest in learning first aid .
The most valuable asset when a tank is hit is to know the use of sulpha powder and pills and
the treatment of burns, puncture and laceration wounds ." He also added, "Everyone in the
armored force should be able to drive a tank. Everyone should be able to do everyone else's
job so that he can carry on under casualties ."
(See Page 35)
SERGEANT FRANK SABIN of the 6th Armored Infantry had several things to say : "1
wish I had learned in the States to have a lot of real fire over my head. We got scared awfully
9
r N K E #Q 5 / N ~!/ N/ 5 / 4
at first . Am, kind of firing over your head would help . It would still pay if you lost one or
two men when you considered whole armies . The way to do it is to crawl and see where they
hit, then either cross to the right or to the left . Just look and use your head . As soon as
they fire fall flat on the ground, and when they reload jump up and run while they do. Experience
and guts count.
"The driver should be ready no matter what happens . Should know all guns, etc. Back
in the States they didn't teach that, but we have to know it here . In garrison I didn't care so
much for work, but I do here . I don't mind it here. New men aren't well-trained. I had a
hard time when I was first in the front lines . I was gun shy, scared. New men should work
themselves in. They shouldn't be in too big a hurry . They must be cautious."
(See Page 41)
SERGEANT GEORGE LELAND, 6th Armored Infantry, said, "Men in the States should
be trained to dig foxholes. It will save lives . Foxholes are better than slit trenches because
they protect a man more and you can fire out of a foxhole and you can't very well out of
a slit trench .
"If I went to the States to train men the first thing I would stress to a new man is
leadership. I would make the man have confidence in his leader, and train him in every
weapon, camouflage, and to dig foxholes; also to cover up tin cans . (Tin cans reflect light
and give away positions .)
"If you are going to harden a soldier up, keep him hardened up and don't let him get
soft . Start hard training and keep it up . Men should be hardened before they go into combat .°
"In the States we didn't have enough night training . Men should be trained in use of
stars for navigation . All men should be trained to know organization in the States ."
(See Page 42)
SERGEANT JOHN D. MAHONEY of the 6th Armored Infantry said, "I found at Maknassy
that too many men stand around the ,.observation point and give the position away . We lost a
man in a counter-battery fire that way .
"We have the most need for training in the .30 and .50 caliber machine guns. Not
all our men can read a compass or a map. We should have had some training in booby
traps. Don't pick up things . Watch where you step.
"I don't think the recruit training is tough enough . The new men are too soft. The
more training the better. We need harder training right now so we won't get soft . Every
man should know how to fire every gun in the battalion and be able to operate the radio ."
(See Page 43)
LIEUTENANT KENNETH D. WARREN of the 6th Armored Infantry had the following suggestions
with reference to training: "Some of our replacements have been riflemen only. We
need men trained in the machine gun and in the 37-mm gun. We have had to train most of
our mortar men. None knew the 75-mm gun . Men should be trained to dig in a machine
gun as well as themselves. A machine gun that can be seen will draw fire just as a vehicle
will ."
(See Page 43)
°NOTE: At another time I was told of a battalion which had to hike 31 miles in mountainous terrain
and then enter combat without any rest .-TJ .
10
/6' T, oot' rioN
APTAIN D. A. KERSTING told me, "Recruits need much more night training before coming
over. I remember spending only 4 nights out in all my night training, but here we spend
40 nights out of every 45 doing night work ; night attack, night outpost, night patrol, etc .
Night training should not have to be learned here when the men have to do it for record .
"The organization of the unit should be known thoroughly, not only by the leaders but
by the privates and by everyone else . You should know what every person does .
"Don't shoot at any plane except when attacked . There should be no shooting at night
even if bombed . All leaders should know compass reading and terrain study thoroughly .
You should always drive without lights except for blackout lights away from the front lines ."
(See Page 45)
GENERAL
To the things the soldiers and officers at the front in Tunisia tell I add the following
observations :
The American tin hat is the finest military washing and laundry equipment ever
given a soldier. With it soldiers can keep themselves and their clothing clean . Remember
a dirty soldier is a bum and mighty liable to be a sick bum .
Our American soldiers have been our best diplomats in Africa . The soldiers like children;
they have given them part of their rations to eat, a piece of candy or a piece of chocolate .
The kindliness of our soldiers to these people has made friends not only of the children but
of their families and all the people, and this is a priceless asset .
The smart American soldiers learned to -give respect and consideration to people who
talk and dress differently from themselves . The dumb American soldier is liable to jeer at anything
strange. This dumb American soldier must be taught very carefully to have good manners,
otherwise he can do more damage in a few minutes than a hundred smart men can ever
atone for. You can figure for yourself how you would feel if a British soldier, or a French
soldier, or an Arab soldier, jeered at the way you trained, or shot, or talked, or ate . Our
soldiers and our officers do represent our country and they absolutely must represent it
properly .
A British officer of the widest tank experience told me that our M4 tank was the
finest tank in the world. He thought it was better than anything else the United Nations
had and was better than anything the Germans had. He thought it would be the best tank
for the next five years. The American soldiers in Africa who fought in these tanks feel the
same way. The confidence and satisfaction of our soldiers in their equipment was well expressed
by SERGEANT BE KER when he said, "I like the M4 . I look at the German tank
and thank God I am in an M4 ."
(See Pages 56 and 28)
T. J . AMP,
Brigadier General
1 1
/N TUN/5 /4
aptured German African Renln.cements enter
raining
at a
Outpost on Djebel bou Douaou - 3 April 1943
12
7TAN/ER5 I N 7o;vW/S 14'
INTERVIEWS AT THE FRONT
SERQEANT R . DuHAMEL, Headquarters ompany,
3rd Battalion, 60th Infantry . Djebel
bou Douaou, 3 April 1943.
I was sent as a replacement . I sailed
from New York 5th March ; landed in Oran
19th March ; sailed from Oran 21st March;
arrived Phillipeville night of 24th March ; left
Phillipeville by truck 25th March ; arrived at
a post near onstantine 25th March; left
26th March ; arrived Ain Beida 27th March ;
left Ain Beida 31st March ; arrived 9th Division
31st March ; was on outpost on this
mountain 1st April.
I am one of 100 replacements of the 60th
Infantry who are on this section of the mountain
range. Some of these men never fired
the rifle. Some, including myself, have never
thrown a live hand grenade. The men have
little respect for authority . They always talk
back as if something was being put over on
them, and never take their orders cheerfully.
The men talked as they came up the mountain
in spite of being cautioned not to . (The
older soldiers, who had been there ten days,
nodded emphatically that this was the case .)
We moved up into the hills here night
before last. Yesterday I got permission to
go out scouting, and took a man with me .
Today I came alone and didn't tell them I
was coming, because I didn't want one of
those other men with me. Yesterday I guarded
some prisoners back. The other men are
quieter today. It was because the men on
patrol exposed themselves so much that I
went off alone today. The commanding officer
of the other company up where I am, a
second lieutenant, 1 overheard saying he
wanted to get away from this new group
because they exposed themselves so much.
13
I left my blankets and pack carrier back
with the APO (Rear echelon of the 1st Armored
Division), and am in with another boy
in a cave. He had four blankets . I didn't
know we were going to stay out . I asked,
and no one knew anything . We left with
one day's rations.
On the way to the front we had good
food and shelter, were in pup tents part of
the time. I had a ride in a truck to a steam
bath near Ain Beida . In camp near onstantine
we were lucky, we had mattresses with
straw. I left my extra clothes back at the
APO; it is all in one barracks bag. The
rations on the way up were good-if they
were " ° rations, they were heated .*
(At 2200, 4 April, Germans made a night
attack on this position. It was repulsed by
hand-to-hand fighting and grenades .)
a
a
°
a
*NOTE: This conversation took place on the
.,top of a jagged mountain peak, Djebel bou Douaou .
For five miles the track we followed to the foot of
the mountain was under observation and within range
of various German guns, and for that reason our
party was limited to one peep load of 3 . The Germans
frequently fired guns, up to 88's even at small
vehicles . The officer who drove the peep had perfected
himself in the SOP for single vehicles to avoid
fire. This procedure is to use a change of pace .
Drive at a relatively high speed long enough for the
Germans to figure a lead, then change abruptly to
a relatively low speed and keep this speed about
long enough for the Germans to figure a new lead,
then go fast again . If this is done properly a vehicle
is hard to hit . We were not fired upon .
I wanted to get a picture which would show
the precipices and the mountain ranges . After we
finished talking I posed the other two of our party
so that the mountain ranges would show in the background
. When the picture was taken we started down
the mountain ; a minute or two later the peak we had
left was plastered with German mortar fire .-TJ
T N K E R 5 / N TUN / S / A
OLONEL STA K, ommanding the 6th
Armored Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943 .
We had a man who stepped on a 'Bouncing
Betty' the other day, but was not badly
hurt. He had an ammunition carrier over
his shoulder and I think that is what saved
him. He said to the doctor, 'Doe, it seemed
that something was just pushing my foot and
leg up in the air when I stepped on it.'
We captured some German rations the
other day and they were good-good food . All
Europe is feeding Germany, as the containers
showed that the food was produced in
zechoslovakia, Belgium, and in many other
countries .
SERGEANT -WILLIAM KEITH, ompany "G",
6th Armored Infantry.
When you are up in a place and not
firing and the enemy are dug in, unless you
can find something definite to shoot at, and
you are sure you can hit it, hold your fire .
It does nothing" but draw enemy fire on you
and will draw mortar fire . Men are hard to
keep quiet and hard to make stay down in
places like that. I think the best place to
work is on the enemy flanks or in behind the
enemy. We traveled fifty miles behind the
enemy lines one time and they never got us .
This was at Kasserine Pass.
The enemy will shoot at anything that
moves and he will shoot anything that he has
got at it . He does a lot of wild firing.
We haven't had many replacements, two
or three in our platoon.
We eat " " rations and they are pretty
good. We don't cook them, but eat them
cold. Get along pretty well on that .
OLONEL STA K: " " ration cans open
below the top. This makes a very messy
dribble and gets the men dirtier than necessary
.
1 4
SERGEANT KEITH : We don't use our mess
kits except when we are back from the front .
Most of the men use the lemon juice in their
water because it seems to make it last longer .
We get a canteen a day and it isn't too much,
but we get along on it.
When you are moving men they are dependent
on the noncommissioned officer or
leader as to how to move forward. Sooner
or later they will lose contact with the noncommissioned
officer, as he has to stay at the
head. You should have a second-in-command .
It is a good thing to have the individual man
keep in contact with the man in front of him .
The new men don't know many of the men
in the company and get lost into some other
platoon or company. If you have a good
second-in-command he can keep them together.
The men follow better than trying
to send a man up by himself .
OLONEL STA K: That is why our losses
are so high in noncommissioned officers and
officers.
SERGEANT KEITH: There is another thing,
sir, we have men in our company that don't
know how to shoot rifles, and that is pretty
tough.
a
a
a
o
SERGEANT WILLIAM T. ETRITGE, ompany
"I", 6th Armored Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April
1943.
Three main things that I think are important
: the first is to keep your weapons
clean-they won't fire if you don't . Stay under
cover. I have had men who . were not under
cover and they haven't come back. Then
get all the fire on the enemy that you can.
Our company has been longer in this battle
than any other company, from the 15th of
February to the 3rd of April. My men were
jumpy then but they are better now. We
get plenty to eat and get a canteen of water
a day.
INTER VIEW S
The enemy has a good machine gun, but
if you can get through you have got him . You
can get away from his artillery and his mortars
.
Three days ago we were going to attack,
we were going towards the hill . I put scouts
out in front. The enemy let my scouts get
within 20 to 25 yards of them and, I guess
thinking we were all there, put mortar fire
behind us and opened up with machine gun
fire ahead . They got my two scouts . The
scouts had got close enough so that they
couldn't be hit by mortar or machine gun,
but it looked as if they were hand grenaded .
The grenades set the grass on fire under the
scouts and when one got up to put the fire
out, they got him . We seen we could not
get past the machine gun so we were ordered
to withdraw.
I would say the enemy's best shots use
telescopic sights . Nobody could shoot that
long a distance and be as accurate . One took
a piece out of the seat of my pants at what
seemed a very long distance . Without a
telescope, he could not see to shoot that close.
After I got back I was watching the hill for
the two scouts and seen six Germans come
back and get one of the scouts ; I know that
he wasn't dead. They wouldn't let us get
up to the other one .
I have replacements that have never shot
a rifle . They came from Fort Knox from the
ooks' and Bakers' School. They came with
pistol belts and rifles . Most have never fired.
I have six of them .
The best way to fight is first artillery, then
tanks, and us to follow tanks up . That hill
is booby trapped and mined .
It is best to keep very quiet . At any time
at night whenever you make a slight noise
the enemy immediately opens up with machine
gun fire and mortars .
We can whip him if we can get to him .
AT TILE F ON T
At one place the enemy had machine
guns placed and protected by snipers . We
were to take the hill . I was 200 to 250 yards
from the enemy and was lying down . I seen
a sniper from the top of his nose up . I knew
that it would take a good shot and I had my
rifle pointed in his direction. I decided to
wait and finally he moved up to chest height
and I squeezed one off but didn't hit him .
Then I seen another, just his helmet, then
he raised and I squeezed another one off ; I
got him, he raised up on his toes and fell over.
I never did get any fire from them . I sent a
scout out to locate machine guns and a sniper
got him in the stomach. There was a bunch
on the hill that fired at everything . This scout
that got wounded knocked six out of one machine
gun nest with a hand grenade and the
other bunch thought that he was going to
throw another one and took off, but were cut
off from behind. That drove them back to
their gun.
All I know to do is to keep firing at them .
The boys have nicknamed the German
machine gun the `typewrites because it is so
fast
You can find anti-personnel mines if you
watch closely as you go along . You can see
three prongs sticking out. About seven
pounds of pressure will set them off . We
have taken them out and put the pins back .
We call them the `jumping jacks' .
One time a boy about 25 yards in front
of our half-track was fussing around and
digging in the ground. All of a sudden he
exclaimed, `Look what I have uncovered-a
bomb!' There was a large size bomb buried
in the ground . I told him to let it alone and
taped it off.
The boys always say that if you want to
spot an enemy plane in the sky to look about
2000 yards in front of the antiaircraft fire.
15
rrrr :
T *V /< ER5
OLONEL STA K : We can't get the men to
lead the airplanes with antiaircraft fire . They
just won't lead enough.
O
O
O
O
SERGEANT LELAND A . SUTHERLAND, ompany
"G", 6th Armored Infantry, Maknassy,
5 April 1943 .
We were attached to the 2nd Battalion
when the last attack was made and we came
under fire. Just the minute we got up there
we made a night attack . The scouts drew
enemy fire. All the machine guns fired and
the men had to learn one thing-that was to
stay down. I lost three men. I can harp
and preach but the men won't get down. The
whole battalion tried to advance but couldn't,
so we had to encircle around the right .
OLONEL RINGSOK asked me how many
men I had . I told him I had 30 men . He took
us around the side and the objective we had
to take was one hill that night . We were
doing fine work as far as jobs could go . But
it got pretty expensive as far as men were
concerned . You could not buck that kind
of dug-in position with rifles, and the artillery
was no good-the enemy would just get
in holes until the firing was over, and come
out unhurt. I have learned that artillery
couldn't hurt you if you just got down in a
foxhole while the firing was going on . The
men soon learned to get down while they are
firing .
They have guns set up that don't have
a grazing fire, but cross-fire . They are set
up to get you on the sky line .
I have no experiences to relate, but have
had the hell scared out of me here for a
'month or so . I have learned that we have
to play for keeps . One thing them Germans
and Italians are like, a corporal in my platoon
says, like gray squirrels ; they can't stay
still, all you have to do is lay down and shoot
them as they pop up. If you wait long
/ N TUN / S / A
16
enough they will pop up . You just lie and
wait. I have got a couple of them myself . I
have seen them knocked down all the way
from here to Oran .
I think that my men are getting smarter
now. They learned from Kasserine Pass . We
lost vehicles and the men scattered. There is
safety in numbers. We had 40 men and got
through them. If you have a patrol of 10
men, and they spot you and shoot at you,
you don't shoot back-you leave. But if you
have a whole platoon you answer them back .
In our company we have not got many
replacements . We got sixteen last night .
Everyone felt good to get them . It made
my platoon feel fine. I put my best men
with them, I picked a good old man for each
new man. The old man showed the new one
just how to dig his fox hole and told him
everything. We were sorry they were mostly
from ooks' and Bakers' School. We need
riflemen .
Our medical battalion takes care of both
sides; if we find Germans we take them in
too . We had two brothers fighting side by
side. One time we had a machine gun nest
to take and one of the two brothers was in
my platoon. We got up to the place where
the machine gun was and this brother got
up to throw a grenade . He got hit in the
head but I know that he wasn't dead. We
couldn't bring him out . We were ordered
to carry on the attack . I don't know whether
he died or what happened to him . Do they
take care of our men the same way? A few
days ago the same kind of thing happened
and the German and Italian medics took care
of some of our boys. A medical corporal
went up there the other day to get one of our
wounded men and was waved back because
the area was booby trapped .
I think that they are the poorest rifle shots
on earth. Our main trouble has been the ar/
MTERV/EWS AT TI/E FRONT
tillery . The M 1 is our best gun . We argue
pro and con on the Springfields and ML's,
but it is the M 1 for me .
It took 3 squads to take a machine gun
nest on high ground at night by working up
by crawling. We got where he couldn't depress
the gun down enough to hit us . We
got him surrounded while the rest of them
drew fire. The men went forward and threw
hand grenades . He shot all around like a
cornered tom-cat. GENERAL WARD was
right up there with us . I was the man that
loaned the rifle to him and he drew fire for
us. His carbine had quit on him . I believe
he also threw a grenade at the machine gun
nest.
It is impossible to fight anybody that is
dug in when you have rifles only. One
doesn't consider the sniper dangerous ; you
consider him more of a harrasser . One thing
is, you can't find him out . I have had glasses
and never could spot them . We put machine
guns out in the night and take them in during
the day. In the day we have observation
posts, one man at them at all times. We have
the observation posts where the most trouble
is expected .
The first night at the front it would give
you the jitters . The enemy would send a
blast of fire to let you know that he was still
there, and they fire all kinds of fire-works .
He has one of the fastest guns I have
ever seen, but he is not accurate. He is the
poorest shot there is, or else I can run the
fastest and dodge the fastest of any one I
know.
The first flares that I seen I thought the
Germans were advancing on me . Now I
don't pay no attention to them, and we throw
them too. The German shoots like hell but
don't hit anything. You can see the tracers
going overhead. The first attack we made I
got one boy shot in the shoulder and it was
17
a long shot, about 1000 yards, but I guess
it was just a lucky shot .
0
0
0
0
STAFF SERGEANT SEABORN DU KETT, 6th
Armored Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943 .
The first thing is to keep your head and
have good concealment. Keep your eyes
open because the Germans are pretty smart
and you have to keep awake to get them . At
Kasserine Pass I know we lost some men by
going to sleep. You got to be awake all the
time. We lost men by wanting to go to sleep .
They seem to get the idea that they should
have rest more than anything else . They
don't get scared until it is too late . Up at Kasserine
Pass a man didn't carry out orders that
he should have, orders to move to the top
of the mountain, and some of those that went
to sleep didn't come out . It is necessary to
obey orders . I believe that my men obey me
because they think that I know what I am
doing, and the new men seem to have confidence
in me. A lot depends on a smart
leader.
We have had no opportunity to use the
weapons on the half-tracks except for antiaircraft
fire.
What ranges for fire have you and the
enemy used?
Around 300 yards . The enemy lets you
get right on him before he fires . He lets you
get right into his traps and then opens up
with machine guns. I have had very little
rifle fire from the enemy.
Most of our casualties have been from
machine gun fire except one that was caused
by a bomb. We had four killed in the last
action, and none wounded.
O
O
O
d
PRIVATE JA K MOORE, ompany "L", 60th
Infantry, Maknassy, 5 April 1943.
It seems like everything the enemy uses
is designed to harrass a man . They start
7NK 6, 5 /N TNN/5 /A
firing at night and the guns seem to crack
overhead, and it makes it seem as if they
were right on top of you. Their tracers seem
to have curves on them . But if you wait, and
take it easy, you can soon tell where they
are. They have flares that make it look like
convoys coming down the road, and they
have flares that are good for nothing, but
make it seem like an attack is taking place .
They have snipers that don't have much of a
chance of hitting anything, but scare the hell
out of you . I am not afraid of it now anymore
but last Monday we took a pretty good beating
from their artillery . It was our second attack,
and many men were pretty scared, but
you readily realize that if you are in the
ground it is pretty ineffective . I try to tell
the men to take it easy . On a patrol the
other day we were looking over an area in
which it was understood there was a machine
gun. We went out and looked around and
nothing happened until we got past it . When
most of the men got past the gun it started
in. We looked all around to find it . One
sergeant got hit twice in the hand and started
to look for a better position to get in . I don't
believe there were any better positions . It
was just as good to lay on the flat ground .
They have a mortar up there . and nobody has
ever got up to it. We hear vehicles that I
guess are bringing ammunition to them . At
night they fire several rounds just for nothing .
Most of them have good guns and it seems as
if they shoot at everything. If a man was over
there with a gun and the enemy knew that
he couldn't hit him, he would shoot anyway .
Three days I laid up there out of gun range,
but they would shoot.
We are doing all right. We got a new
bunch last night and they were jittery and
nervous at first and because of it we nearly
lost a lieutenant . I don't blame the new men
for getting jumpy . The sergeant put these
men in digging new positions. One of the
18
fellows was digging when another man came
up. He gave the countersign but the new
man, because lie was jittery I guess, didn't
hear it, reached down and brought his gun
up and fired. It was lucky that he missed
though; the distance was about eight feet .
The other day a few got scared and made a
run for it, but a second lieutenant got them
back in their positions and they stayed it out .
This was during a real shrapnel barrage . They
took it pretty good . We were glad to get
replacements and they are very anxious to
learn . I believe that no matter how long a
man has been in the Army, until he hears that
first one go over, he is a rookie .
a
a
a
APTAIN GAIL H. BROWN, 60th Infantry,
Maknassy, 5 April 1943 .
I have learned considerable from many
true experiences, first of all about foxholes .
It is something no one back in the States
realizes the importance of, until he actually
comes under fire. The next thing I would
consider important is being able to shoot
at the proper time rather than wasting ammunition;
this was a big thing at our landing
at Port Lyautey.
The next thing that I noticed up here,
the first night we hit here and made the attack
towards the big hill, was a massing of
troops when they came under fire . They
herded together like sheep . I was weapons
commander at the time. I found machine
guns emplaced close together and where they
had no field of fire. The heavy machine guns
and light machine guns placed close together.
However, after organizing my own
machine guns and mortars and trying to help
the infantry to spread out and get a field of
fire, they actually learned for themselves,
because that night enemy artillery and mortar
fell in on us. As it was they were spread
/IV TER VIEW S
out and well dispersed . The troops learn
very fast .
The next thing that I find important is
the getting of information down to the troops,
for the very simple reason that they don't
know what is happening and they don't know
what to expect and what to do at the proper
time.- It has been emphasized before, but
the officers don't seem to realize the importance
of it. The discipline is very good
and the morale high . Replacements seem to
help in this because it seems like the men
have someone new to talk to and tell stories
to. At one time we were to get replacements
and were told that they were coming
in but they didn't come . The morale went
down a lot that night. Last night they came
in and we told them to dig foxholes and
everything that we learned by experience.
The replacements look like a good bunch of
boys. They were a little scared at first because
they didn't know what to expect and
the people at the rear told them so many
different stories . The replacements arrived
last night and received baptism of mortar
fire this morning . Nobody was hurt because
they dug all night and had good foxholes .
We remove enemy mines by tying a heavy
stick on a rope and dragging them out and
exploding them. Handle the booby traps in
the same way .
I had one experience that I will never
forget. It was the second day of battle and
we were making an attack that night .
OLONEL TOFFEE, Battalion ommander,
was just wounded in the knee and the Executive
Officer was in the Rear ommand Post.
I was up by GENERAL WILBUR, who had
been up at the time to reorganize the troops
on the ridge. Then I went on up and got
on top to help in this and found no American
troops but looked into the faces of German
troops. I got two incendiary bombs thrown
19
AT THE FONT
in my face and was shot at also . I shot back
and believe that I got one . Then my pistol
wouldn't work any more so I got out of there.
I later found out that the boys were back rcorganizing
.
Most of our casualties have been from
mortars and artillery and some machine gun
fire. They open up with machine gun fire
at night and our machine guns fire back .
Then they open up with mortars and artillery
fire. The mortars seemed to be coming
in from the back of us .
LIEUTENANT OLONEL L . V. HIGHTOWER,
Executive Officer, 1st Armored Regiment,
First Armored Division . ( ommanding Officer,
3rd Battalion, 1st Armored Regiment,
during battles of Faid Pass and Sidi bou Zid . )
1 March 1943.°
In tank fighting nothing is more important
than expert reconnaissance of your routes
of advance and withdrawal . Several times
both we and the Germans have moved up
on what we thought was a good clear route
,only to find a dry wash, nine or ten feet high,
blocking our way, causing us to withdraw .
In this country, too, we've learned to move
slowly so as not to reveal our position . You
can't boil up to battle at high speed without
broadcasting your coming in a big cloud of
dust.
German antitank gunnery has made our
reconnaissance a particularly tough job . They
drag their big 88-mm guns up behind their
tanks and drop them in position . Usually the
crew digs the gun in a hole, twelve by twelve
by six feet deep, practically covering up the
shield and exposing only the barrel of the
gun. We've found those guns particularly hard
°NOTE: The next four interviews took place
before my arrival . I had a copy of them and we
discussed them.-TJ
T N K E R 5
to locate and they can break up your entire
show if you don't pick them up in time . Apparently
they use mats to hide the muzzle
blast. Once we hunted a gun within a
thousand yards for three days and then only
found it by spotting the personnel approaching
the gun position .
Generally they try to suck you into an
antitank gun trap . Their light tanks will
bait you in by playing around just outside
effective range. When you start after them,
they turn tail and draw you in within range
of their 88-mm guns . First they open up on
you with their guns in depth . Then when
you try to flank them you find yourself tinder
fire of carefully concealed guns at a shorter
range . We've just got to learn to pick those
guns up before closing in on them .
Although we've knocked down several
enemy aircraft we find that our men are having
trouble with their leads . You've got to
shoot planes as you would ducks . The big
fault with our antiaircraft fire is that about
sixty percent of it does not have enough lead .
Our boys don't seem to realize the speed of
those ships. The .50 caliber machine guns,
/N 7!/N/5 /4
Side view of the German 88-mm Gun
20
however, will keep 'em high ; German pilots
seem to despise the stuff.
The basic training they had in the States
means a lot to our boys over here . Every
time they hit the ground you'll find them digging
a helluva big hole . I have yet to see
one man get hit in a properly dug slit trench .
One of my lads dug a shallow one and he
came out with a bullet hole clear through
the cheeks of his tail. You don't have to
mention light discipline to them . They'll
hoop and holler at anyone who uses a light
at night, regardless of rank.
We've also learned that it's important for
everyone to know what to do with wounds,
especially shock . Although I saw one man
die of shock from a simple hand wound, I've
also seen our men save almost five hundred
casualties by prompt treatment of their
wounds with sulpha drugs and proper treatment
for shock. Most of the sulpha drugs
are administered by the men themselves . A
couple of weeks ago one of my sergeants
fixed up a man who had been severely
wounded on the head and neck when lie was
/NTER VIEW S
blown ofi a tank . Today, the man is back
in action .
The support artillery gives us is only as
good as their observer . ommanders must
get in the habit of assigning their best men
as artillery observers .
Our 37-mm guns will knock out tanks if
the crews will only camouflage their guns
perfectly and then hold fire until the enemy
comes in at point blank range . German camouflage
is excellent ; it's hard to believe they
can hide a gun as well as they do . The rifle
grenade is a good weapon at close quarters
and will knock out anything under a Mark VI .
When the Germans go into position they'll
hide their guns and tanks in anything, including
Arab huts . And then they dress
their personnel in Arab garb while going
to and from their positions. Usually they'll
try to suck you inside of a 1200 yard range .
They frequently use machine guns to range
themselves in and you.can duck their shells
by watching their machine gun fire. When
they're moving they'll shoot at anything that
looks suspicious and they'll generally knock
down every Arab house in sight. We think
that's a good idea and are beginning to follow
suit . Sometimes they'll get the range with
high burst smoke shells. But when we see
three of those in a line we take off-that's the
high sign for the Stukas . When firing, we
always shoot low-even the ricochets will
hit them. Most of our misses have been high.
We also need a good system for identifying
friendly tanks . Once when my radio was
knocked out I heard my own tanks turning
their guns on me-and I really sweated out
that approach . At dusk it's always hard to
tell which vehicles are friendly, and we're
always afraid to shoot until they're right on
top of us. When the Stukas come over, the
German tanks send up a line of rockets and
orange smoke to show their positions.
AT THE FRONT
2 1
One evening several Mark l\'s followed
a British tank column right up to their tank
park until a 25 pounder battery spotted the
strangers on the tail of the column and blew
them off the road.
In using tanks in action, take it very slowly
. Germans do it that way all the time .
Do not shift gears once you start, particularly
in the dusk, because the backfires will give
you away . Keep the tanks out of column at
all times . Never travel in column, travel in
V, line, wedge, but never in column . Stay
off the roads. Get off the roads and never
use them . You don't need an assembly area
for a reinforced battalion . You can go right
into action without first using an area . Push
your tank destroyers well forward, and keep
your infantry ahead.
It is according to the situation whether
the infantry goes ahead of the tanks. If it
is a defense position that has had a chance
to organize positively and definitely, I would
most certainly have the infantry with the
tanks . I would have them follow the tanks
on foot, but I would have the infantry right
there. Once those 88-mm guns start to bark,
you can't pick them up in your tank . Attack
them with infantry . Get the infantry
out of the half-tracks . Don't take any thinskinned
vehicles with the tanks, they open
on them the first thing. Don't take your assault
guns or mortars with your tanks, because
they will smash them in open country.
The artillery observer has got to be right
with the assault company commander or the
tank battalion commander, and I mean not
more than 35 or 40 yards away . Of course
that is standard operating procedure . I just
mention it because it is so necessary .
Teach your commanders to stay out of
the fight until they are the last tank or thereabouts.
They are too prone to become inT
N K E R S
terested in a personal duel, and forget about
their control of the units .
A reconnaissance of the field, if you are
lucky enough to be able to make it, is the
most important thing I can think of .
Medium tanks don't get bogged down so
easily. If you come to a bog, don't ever let
them try to shift gears, shift before.
The Germans bring their 88-mm guns
towed behind their tanks (may be 75-mm
guns, or both-I know they bring 88-mm
guns). They tow them up and dig in . Their
tanks come out and get your attention and,
unless you know their tricks, they lead you
right between their guns and they get behind
you and get you. Don't always bite
at the first 88-mm guns which shoot- at you .
There will be several up much closer. The
first 88-mm gun that barks and the first tank
are generally bait and you shouldn't plunge
at them. If they stage any night attack or
late evening attack and neither side stays
there, they will come out and put their 88-mm
guns in no-man's-land away ahead of where
their tank positions are. Their tanks were
within 1000 yards of the Pass, but their guns
were 4000 yards ahead of the Pass .
Four 88-mm guns, if dug in, are a match
for any tank company . They are the most
wonderful things to camouflage I have ever
seen. They are very low to the ground . You
can watch the fire coming in, little dust balls
on the ground give them away and show
how low they are. They just skip along
the ground. The pit is 12 by 12 by 6. The
gun looks like a pencil or black spot. The
shield is level with the piece and all you can
effectively see is the tube. The crew is even
dressed in Arab clothes, and they do everything
to camouflage their position . You can
get them out with high eplosive ammuni-
/ N j!J N / S / 4
22
tion, with your artillery . If a tank gun can
find them, you can get them out . Over 1200
yards there is no use worrying about them .
Their shells bounce off the medium tank at
that range . Under 1200 yards, watch out .
The enemy's gunnery stinks at long ranges .
I feel that our men are better. If we -can
fight a tank for a tank and a gun, I think we
can do it, and that is giving them great odds,
because I would say the gun is worth - four
tanks, but we can do it .
You can see the shells coming . You can
watch the adjustments they are making.
They all seem to be short and behind. Then
they get up and begin to shoot under the
tank. During this time, we knocked out four
tanks . We picked off the leader . You can
tell after awhile which is the leader by the
difference in the vehicles . They pick at such
things as half-tracks with two antennas, etc .,
and we caught on after a while. When you
get one of their commanders they stop and
seem sort of dazed.
The ten German tanks were sitting on a
ridge shooting at half-tracks . They had been
at my left rear and I hadn't seen them. There
was a Mark VI, Mark IV's, and some Mark
111's.-They stopped on the crest and did a
right flank and started to get in column. They
will put a Mark VI in the middle and the
others on the flanks, always making one flank
heavier than the other, however. We- picked
out one and hit him and he stopped. We
burned the next one . Then the Mark VI,
which I thought was a Mark IV, came close .
They are hard to identify, but have a more
or less square outline, with an offset box
on the side. You cannot identify their guns .
We bounced four off the front of him . Then
another tank came up right along side of him,
and it was easy to move a hair to the left and
pick him off. We had no armor piercing amINTERVIEWS
AT THE FRONT
munition so I know a high explosive shell
will crack a Mark IV. You should shoot low
and it will ricochet and kill them in the turret,
or damage them so they will be of no use .
Our 105-mm gun is good against tanks . I
watched one gun hit three tanks coming in a
big mass of tanks, approximately thirty tanks,
and with high explosive ammunition he collapsed
three of them like taking shoe boxes
and shoving them flat. The rest of them scattered
or moved up to the right . We had to
leave because more were moving up.
The 50-mm gun is almost the same as to
amount of powder as the 88-mm gun . I think
their antitank guns are mostly 88-mm and
75-mm. The only 50-mm I have seen are in
Mark III's and Mark IV's . Just go slow and
watch them. Get your reconnaissance out in
front, men on foot . If you rush right out there
you will rush right into it. You want some
artillery well forward . 105-mm guns shooting
at over five thousand yards aren't much
value. I think they shouldn't ever be over
4000 yards in either direct or indirect fire.
View of a German Mark VI Tank with
its 88-mm gun turned to the rear
23
I worked against hostile infantry some .
We got a few of them and they went in their
foxholes. We shot at them and don't know
whether or not we got a lot of them. They will
stand there and use those 20-mm cannon at
you, but it doesn't bother you . I did run across
a small German or Italian tank and found the
tail end of a rifle grenade near it and the tank
was burned and . blasted to pieces .
Stukas with 500 pound bombs really don't
hurt the tanks unless there is a direct hit,
except for the dust. You have to move out
of it. When the _ Stukas appear the Germans
shoot green and white, or green and red,
flares, changing every . day-they also shoot
a blast of orange gas to identify themselves.
Another thing, they mark a target with three
smoke shells. After these three bursts you had
better clear out, for they will be over in about
one minute.
They use a lot of high burst ranging . The
artillery will shoot one, apparently getting
the range from a map, and they will hit one
overhead and then drop right down on you.
T N/ ERS
It is easy to dodge an 88-mm gun because
they start with machine gun bullets . When
they begin hitting you, turn suddenly right
or left to avoid it.
Bore sight to beat hell but don't let the
boys try to do it at 1000 yards so the axis of
sight and tube coincide, because when you
are shooting at 6000 yards there is no telling
where it will hit . Keep your sights parallel .
Bore sight on a distant object; the more distant
the more effective. We had one tank
which threw a track which we couldn't possibly
get started, and we had a lot of ammunition.
That commander stood there with
his glasses and proceeded to throw a lot of
high explosive shells. German tanks went in
all directions. That quadrant is very worth
while; and glasses are necessary .
Before we put a single round of ammunition
in our carrying racks we try them in
their guns. A lot of them won't fit, and the
battlefield is a bad place to find it out,
although I know of two sergeants who
climbed out under fire and rammed the shells
out.
At Sbeitla it was the tanks that bothered
us more than the antitank guns . There were
just too many. With a detached air, we were
just seeing how many of them we could get
before they got us . The Germans-will come
up about 60 yards at a time, sitting there
looking, then moving again. The Mark VI was
the main threat. Our boys always came out
of the top of the tank, not the escape hatch .
Sometimes the Germans machine gun the
crews and other times they don't bother . I
was very thankful for my good physical condition.
We had to run about half a mile before
even halting. The country was very flat and
they could have got us with machine gun
f ire.
/ N TUN / S / 4
OLONEL STA K: We have got to do some
sucking in ourselves instead of being sucked
in. Move with extended intervals, not all in
front, but with a long tail so that when they
do pull a trap or envelopment there will be
something to back us up . ompanies should
be deployed with considerable distance between
them .
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER: I
think it should be nearer 9 wave tank attack
rather than 3 wave. Watch the envelopments
and hideouts . I still believe that at 2 to 1 odds
we can lick them, because our boys can shoot
better. I have seen one German tank versus
one American tank and the Americans - hit
many shots before they. They can't hit at all
at long ranges .
Every battery I saw of the 91st Field Artillery
did a bang-up job all the time, and I
have had them all at -one time or another.
"A" o. of the 701st Tank Destroyer stayed
right to the bitter end and Wray should be
promoted. He salvaged vehicles on the field
and did a fine job. We could use him in the
regiment. He is so utterly fearless and his
men are the same way. Of course my men are
the bravest in the world .
a
Q
Q
A
1ST LIEUTENANT H . F. HILLENMEYER, ommander,
ompany "H", 1st Armored Regiment,
1st Armored Division . (Platoon Leader,
ompany "H", during battles of Faid Pass,
Rebaou, Sidi bou Zid .) 1 March 1943.
Sir, if we're going to get anywhere, we
must put greater emphasis on good reconnaissance.
I know of one instance where we went
into battle not knowing what was there . We
saw the enemy tanks go into Faid Pass and
that night we had a dry run back in our concentration
area . Next day when the attack
came off we found the thing was a blind-the
24
/LATER VIEWS AT THE FRONT
Pass was covered with deadly antitank stuff.
It plastered our one company that went in .
The Germans always seem to know what's
there before they attack. They use air-photo
reconnaissance. For several days before an
attack we can set our watches by the JU-88
that comes over each morning and evening
taking pictures . If we fire on him he'll hurry
home and come back with a pack of Stukas .
Those 88-mm guns have been causing us
trouble because it's hard for us to knock them
out with our flat trajectory weapons . They're
dug in too deeply and we need real artillery
support with good observation to root them
out.
When you fire on the German tanks, they
play a bag of tricks . First they stop, causing
you to think you knocked them out. When you
turn around on something else-whaml they
open up on you .
As a platoon leader, I learned that you've
got to lead your men. When you get out in
front, they'll follow you easily . If you're mov=
ing in sections, the platoon leader must go
in the forward section. And what's almost as
important is the fact that every man must
know what's going on. You've got to take
them into your confidence and explain the
show to them. They'll always respond with
better fighting.
You've probably heard this too, before, sir
-but the smaller units are simply not given
enough time to prepare their individual plan
of attack or maneuver. Higher headquarters
should realize that we need some time to get
the show running .
It would really be worth the time, over in
the States, for the . men to shoot at night with
tracer bullets. the Germans use all tracers
and sometimes they raise hell with the troops .
Tracers throw a helluva scare into you anyhow;
every one looks as if it's headed straight
for you. The Germans are cracker-jacks at
25
night fighting-our men need more training
in it.
In a scrap we throw high explosive stuff
until the enemy comes in range and then we
change to armor piercing . Sometimes we set
the high explosive for delay, fire low, and
watch the Germans duck wildly as it ricochets
over the ground.
I'm also concerned, sir, with another question
of tactics which is probably none of my
business. But we had always been taught that
the Germans attacked at dawn or in the early
morning light . Actually, however, they're even
more apt to hit at dusk with only half an hour
of light left in the sky, just to confuse you.
Then they'll throw everything they have at
you-including their star shells and Very lights
-in an attempt to put you on the run .
We don't fire on planes until they start
firing. If we did, we would have had the
Stukas on our necks every time.
It's extremely important that we keep our
star markings. Several times we were about
to open fire on our own tanks, until we saw
their markings .
One day an 88-mm shell knocked a piece
of armor plate into one of my tanks while the
shell lodged in the tank wall.
`Shut the door', the driver screamed to the
man in the turret, `there's tracers coming in
down herel'
s
0
0
e
SERGEANT BASKEM BENNETT, Tank ommander,
ompany "H", 1st Armored Regiment,
1st Armored Division, 1 March 1943 .
I almost lost my driver and assistant driver
once when the tank caught fire as the turret
was turned to the rear position. They were
able to get out only when another man in my
crew jumped back in the burning tank and
turned the turret, allowing these two to get
away.
T M K E rQ S
No sir, I have not used any smoke as yet,'
although it might be OK against one of those
big Mark VI's .
(Asked to give an account of his experiences
in the battle of Faid Pass, Sergeant Bennett
continued :)
We had started across the field, sir, when
suddenly ten German tanks came up on our
flank. They opened up on me and hit me three
or four times before they came through .
Meanwhile we were firing continually .
About that time two 77-mm shells went
through .the turret and I discovered that my
tank was on fire. I called down to the driver
and radio man, but they must have been hit,
because they didn't answer. The tank was
burning badly now so I jumped out with the
remainder of my crew . Our tank was burning
yet, but it just kept going forward, and we
jumped into a ditch and watched it go .
N Tv .v f s . 4
Soon we were surrounded by German
tanks . We lay in the ditch for several hours
until one of the German tanks started toward
us. We thought he was going to run us down
so we stood up with our hands over our heads.
The German officer in the tank spoke good
English. He asked me where our side-arms
were and we told him we didn't have any.
He asked where our carrier was and we
pointed to our tank which had traveled
several hundred yards down the field before
burning out completely .
The German officer then pointed towards
our lines and told us to go so we took off
quickly.
All together we fired about 20 shells . We
hit two tanks and I know one was really
knocked out because I saw it go up in flames .
o
e
e
a
26
Front View of a German Mark II Tank and an American M5 Tank
INTER V/E W S
SERGEANT JAMES H. BOWSER, Tank ommander,
ompany "ti", 1st Armored Regiment,
1st Armored Division, 1 March 1943 .
Yes sir, this is my third tank but I've still
got all of my original crew with me . We were
burned out of our other two tanks under fire.
Our ammunition supply has been goodwe've
always gotten the stuff we needed
although we had to quit our two tanks -long
before we used up our ammunition . A tank
commander has got to remember that he can
knock the track off a Mark IV long before he
can hit it with armor piercing ammunition.
The high explosive ammunition might be OK
against the Mark VI's, but we always saw too
many of them to give it much of a try.
The Germans usually open up with their
machine guns while they're ranging you in
with their heavier stuff. The driver can tell
when they're coming close so he keeps n-koving
and ducks them. I hardly ever talk to my
driver in battle-I just let him keep driving .
We always stopped to shoot but we did turn
the stabilizer on when we were moving . I
guess the stabilizer's all right for what it was
built.
The gunnery instruction they gave us in
the States was good . No sir, I wouldn't change
it. There's just one thing you must remember
when you're fighting Germans . When you
shoot at them they stop and try to kid you into
thinking you knocked them out. Then when
you turn your back on them, they open up
again. Sir, we shoot until they stop and then
keep shooting until they burn up .
Sometimes we've attacked with the sun in
our eyes and that makes it pretty tough on the
gunner. He can't see where he's shooting
while the Germans sit back there and pop
anywhere they want to.
AT THE I #_QoNr
I think, sir, that if you trained a battalion
of infantry to operate at night, they could slipinto
a German tank park and really raise hell .
One night after we were burned out of our
tank during action, we made our way to
within 30 yards of a parked tank, thinking it
was an Arab hut. They don't seem to worry
about security at night .
It's a good idea, too, to check your ammunition
closely. Once I had to climb out of
a tank during an action to ram a bent shell
case out of my gun, and then hurry back in
before the machine guns got me .
(Asked to give an account of his experiences
in the battle of Faid Pass, Sergeant Bowser
continued :)
I'm on the right of my platoon -leader and
he's in the center. I've got another tank on my
right. We start in at daylight, move down the
Pass between the mountain and the marsh,
and pretty soon at nine o'clock we run" into
the Germans. They started in with their
machine guns but we just let it rattle by and
then they opened up with their heavy stuff.
I looked to the center and saw the lieutenant's
tank go up in fire . So I turned my gun on the
antitank gun that knocked him out. and
smashed it with my first shot of high explosive
ammunition. We knew that it was really
hot; nine of our tanks had been cleaned out.
They knocked my track off but I said, 'Hell,
we'll sit here and use her as a pillbox.'
Then one of my boys said our tank_ was
burning. I didn't know how long it had been
on fire . Still the fire didn't look too bad, so we
stuck by our guns and kept shooting until an
explosion almost rocked us out of the tank .
One of my crew was .wounded but the others
were all right, so we took off towards our own
lines. We walked for two hours and carried
the wounded man . with us . Several times along
the way German airplanes strafed us .
0
0
0
0
27
rA N K E R S / N ~!/ N/ S / A
ONVERSATIONS WITH MEMBERS OF
THE 3RD BATTALION, 1ST -ARMORED
REGIMENT, OMBAT OMMAND "B",
1ST ARMORED DIVISION, MAKNASSY, 4
APRIL 1943. ENEMY A TIVITY AUSED
INTERRUPTIONS.
SERGEANT SWATZLANDER, ompany "I", 1st
Armored Regiment, 1st Armored Division .
Sir, if I had a brother coming in combat,
I would want him to know well the functioning
of the tank and all its guns . I would want
him to know personal care-just how long to
stay with a damaged tank before leaving it :
After it has been hit it is a big fire hazard . You
stay as long as you can . If you have to leave,
you do it quickly.
My tank crew were good ; I think they
were the best. I think we will lick the Germans.
I have one new man . He is good, learns
fast, and works well . He was formerly with
the 2nd Armored Division, I believe, and was
a truck driver.
Steel tracks are better than rubber track
when we don't have hard surface roads.
How do you know how to aim with the different
ammunition?
Learn and you know it. I don't follow a
table, I never look at it.
I run the tank by the inter-phone . No
trouble.
When do you button up?
I stay open.
The .50 caliber guns are good against aircraft,
especially to keep them up there and
prevent strafing.
I fire mostly individually and not as a section
or platoon.
I use cover and concealment as much as
possible, but there isn't any right here .
O
O
O
O
28
SERGEANT BE KER, ompany `G
1st
Armored Regiment.
Don't lose your head; being jittery in battle
ruins a lot of communications . Keep your
head-main thing.
We have the right ammunition .
Don't button up your tank or you can't
see anything .
M4's are fine.
It's a funny thing, being tank commander .
You have got to run the crew, be stem, and
show leadership. I had a new driver for an
M3 tank . I told him to drive up a slope to a
certain place and then stop. He got excited
and went all the way up the hill. I told him to
back up to the right place. He got excited
again and went all the way back down the
hill. He wouldn't listen to the inter-phone
communication so I hollered to the 37 gunner
to stop him, as I had my head out . Finally we
stopped him and we drove up to a safe firing
place and I asked him why he didn't pay
attention to me .
Over night, I explained how I wanted him
to drive and how I wanted him to pay attention,
and I told him if he didn't I would close
his slot up completely and make him drive
blind. That fixed him. I think I have a good
driver now.
I am lucky, as I have never lost a tank, but
how I don't know . We saved two tanks out
of the company.
When our platoon leader told us to withdraw,
we withdrew by backing up . He became
confused, perhaps because his gun was
pointed to the side . Instead of backing up he
turned at right angles and ran up on a ridge .
He didn't come back.
I like the M4. I look at the German tank
and thank God I am in an M4 . The M3 is
nice looking, but should be three feet lower .
I think we will lick the Germans in time.
I think we are good.
INTER V/E W S
I haven't heard any news in four days ..
The rumor in the company is that we had
Faid Pass. But our platoon leader says `no'.
('No' was right.)
You can't do nothing unless you have a
good driver. He must go where you want him
to go.
o
a
a
e
SERGEANT SIPES, ompany "G", 1st Armored
Regiment.
New men need more 'training . They
haven't enough gunnery and no driving instruction.
I am a tank driver and was in action in
Faid Pass . I didn't get my tank out. I button
up my tank when not in bad terrain . I fire as
a part of the platoon if possible ; if not, I fire
individually . I fire in hull defilade and fire
both while moving and still .
I have learned not to rush into anything
you can't see. We fight too fast, should go
slower and be sure of ourselves . The best way
is to fight as a platoon . over each other as
they move forward. I haven't been able to
A T THE TR O NT
Front View of a German Mark III Tank
and an American M4 Tank
29
use the blitz tactics they taught us. vur tactics
is for some in hull defilade as the others move
forward.,
In my tank an 88-mm shell came through
the turret and set fire to the powder ; only
four got out, two out of the door and two out
of the turret . I don't think the door should be
locked. If the gun is to the rear, you can't get
out the door. I have an M4. There should be
a larger opening hole, so in case the turret is
to the rear, you can get out.
As a driver, I pick out targets and maneuver
into position with the help of the tank
commander . I know never to pull up over a
hill without stopping in hull defilade and observing
first .
I think we have learned a lot and can lick
them. It's bad enough to be on the winning
side, it would be terrible to be on the losing
side .
How close up is your maintenance company?
MAJOR MILLS, Regimental Motor Officer :
Just back of companies and battalion when in
combat.
T N K E R 5
OLONEL HAINES: The Battalion had
crossed 500 or 600 yards across a bridge which
was under fire. The maintenance was also
across . A message came in to the ommand
Post: `Need some of Pappy's boys'. (Pappy is
the motor officer and Pappy's boys are his
men.)
I asked if any big boys were needed ; the
answer was, `not just yet' . °
We have two pappy's, but we don't think
the Germans know them, or what each does .
The medium tank had damaged a track.
We sent a wrecker over under cover of darkness-
a distance of thirty miles . The wrecker
was not needed, but it did escort the tank
back, as it was thought that track would not
hang on. The tank had 31 track connection
guides broken loose and the tank was started
back to the service park on its own power
without repair with the wrecker following in
case needed. The tank came in without repair
.
Where do you change engines?
MAJOR MILLS: Back with rear echelon
maintenance if situation warrants it, closer if
situation is possible-in regiment.
OLONEL HAINES: The maintenance company
got cut up at Sidi bou Zid . They are now
doing swell military police duty and guarding
mine fields .
We drew 36 M4A2 Diesel tanks from the
British. We like them very much.
°NOTE: This was a perfect radio message .
Here is an example of a bad radio message : ' olonel,
my command post and command half-track arc 100
yards down from that tank burning on top of the
hill . Jerry is shooting everything that moves in or
out here. I am going to wait and move out when
I think he can't see me .'. I was beside this halftrack
which had been hit by a splinter when the
shot hit the tank .-TJ
30
/ N '~!/ N / S / 4
We don't wear tin hats in tanks, but they
are never out of hand's reach.
Make your training program include more
battlefield tactics'.
More training in:
1 . Physical conditioning .
2. First aid (men have saved and can
save each other's lives) .
3. Marksmanship in major weapons .
4. Observation with field glasses .
5. Estimation of terrain, range, etc .
6. Personal reconnaissance .
7. First and second echelon repair for all
crew.
8. All ranks should know how to set up,
use, and maintain communications .
OLONEL HIGHTOWER: A lot more and
better target practice is needed for tanks. It is
better to miss 500 rounds in the United States
than one round here .
OLONEL HAINES: The driver is less important
than the gunner . The gunner should
have a higher rating .
The ` ' ration is cooked by the crew .
There should be a cooker in each tank .
OLONEL HAINES: lothing and combat
suits are adequate . Replacements are hard to
get .
I had trouble getting one soldier to wear
his helmet. He claimed it was too heavy . The
other day he came over to me . He said, `I'll
never be without this helmet again. You will
never have trouble getting me to wear it.'
'Why?' I asked.
He showed me his helmet. 'See this dent,'
he said, `just look at it .'
0
0
0
O
INTERVIEWS AT THE TRONT
INTERVIEWS WITH OFFI ERS AND
MEN OF THE 2ND BATTALION, 1ST ARMORED
REGIMENT, AFTER GENERAL
McQUILLAN'S ADVAN E THROUGH
REBAOU PASS, 11 APRIL 1943.
STAFF SERGEANT KERMIT JA KSON, ompany
"D", 2nd Battalion, 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 .
I've picked up a lot of stuff that I didn't
know when I came over here. The most important
thing that I've learned is to keep in
hull defilade at all times. You can't barrel-ass
across open country. In Sidi bou Zid we had
8 tanks left in a wadi with me. The platoon
leader gave orders to pull back . I decided to
get back as fast as possible and barrel-assed
back and got hit in the ass with an 88. If I
had backed out I probably would have come
out OK.
In a wadi, the company commander was
looking for a place to cross . He found one,
and 88-mm guns were waiting . They didn't
use their armor piercing ammunition but used
their high explosive ammunition . We all
crossed in column . They didn't open up until
the rear tank crossed, then opened with armor
piercing shell. I never saw so much armor
piercing. All tanks took off cross country and
tried to outrun bullets, but couldn't run fast
enough. I got in a hull defilade-and saw nothing
but fires . Every tank on high ground was
burning.
Any time that 88-mm guns open up you
can expect enemy tanks on your flanks, and
you had better start backing up or they will
follow a pincer movement about your flanks .
Now we keep ' more of our tanks in reserve
and on the` . flanks and we use the German
'cod-lock'. od-lock means a cinch . We pull
it on them since they have caught us and we
plan to use it on them in the future, too.
31
Here is what I mean by 'cod-lock' . In the
battle of El Guettar we received a report of
70 tanks that were preparing to attack . We
were all set. The field artillery was going
to give them air burst . We were going to put
some tanks out for decoy. We then were
going to suck them through the pass by
backing up through it. Back of the pass
was a reverse slope that had tank destroyers
on it, and back of them were a battalion of
tanks, who were going to attack on the flanks,
should they come through.
There was only one way, and that was
through the pass. We kept playing about out
of 88 fire and they started after us but
wouldn't come through. We have learned the
lesson and hope to teach the Germans a few
of their own tricks .
When a tank catchess fire, you come out
any way you can. I came out the turret once,
and not the escape door, as I was supposed to
do. In that escape I think most of the men
got out of the tank but didn't get back to our
own lines. Men should be cautioned to go
separately and not bunch up, as the Germans
will machine gun you if you are bunched.
LIEUTENANT HOLTZMAN: Sergeant Jackson
has received the silver star citation once
and has been recommended a second time . In
the second citation he gave help to a wounded
man under heavy shell fire after safely
maneuvering his tank to defilade the
wounded man. If he had not backed the tank
to help the wounded man he probably would
not have been here now, as several shells fell
where his tank had been.
The tank is the best slit trench in the
world when shells or bombs are falling; I feel
safe in it and stick close to it at all times .
I was commanding officer of my platoon
in the last fight. The Germans let the platoon
go through and started shelling me. They pick
the leaders off first if possible . I saw their fire,
T N K ER5 /N TUN/5 /A
and put out their gun position, but you can't
find the guns unles you see the flashes . They
usually camouflage their guns . They do a
damn swell job of it.
•
e 0 0
SERGEANT DE KER, ompany "D", 1st
Armored Regiment, Krerouf, 11 April 1943.
In our last position at Gabes Pass, I saw
gun positions that had been tunneled 30 feet
back in the rocks . They were still good after
being shelled by 155's. After the capture of the
position I had permission of the platoon commander
to go in the area looking for German
radio receivers. These excellent gun positions
are not the rule, only when they have lots of
time.- Their general procedure is to mine gun
positions so tanks can't come up to run over
them.
LIEUTENANT LASELL, ompany "D", 1st
Armored Regiment, Krerouf, 11 April 1943 .
That sand mound might be a good German
gun position (he pointed to a sand
mound 200 yards away); you couldn't see the
gun from here .
•
0 0 0
LIEUTENANT Mc RA KEN, 2nd Battalion, 1st
Armored Regiment, Krerouf, 11 April 1943 .
Everyone thought SERGEANT JA KSON'S
buddy, SERGEANT HAMNER, was
cracked when he remarked that he saw a
building moving around. But it was a German
gun position . They are very smart and use
houses, sand dunes, or hay stacks as gun positions
. The moving building turned out to be a
vehicle with windows painted on representing
windows of a house .
The Germans not only hate lead and
shrapnel as much as we do, but they definitely
don't like smoke . I think SERGEANT JA KSON
will bear me out in this . It has an awful
effect on their morale.
Another thing is ricochet firing. atch a
tank approaching and drop a high explosive
32
shell 60 to 80 yards in front . Give it time to
travel the necessary distance and it will burst
on their heads . I don't like high bursts and I
know they don't either .
Ricochet bursts in a half-moon pattern and
has five or six times more explosive force than
ordinary ground bursts . It drives them down
in a slit trench; then wait for them to come
out, and then give them another one.
The German tanks and gun carriers have
their mufflers and exhausts pointed to the
high heavens rather than to the ground, thus
eliminating another possibility of raising dust
clouds .
One time when we were short of binoculars,
GENERAL WARD took field glasses
from his Division Staff to give to the tank
commanders .
•
a e e
LIEUTENANT BORESH, ommanding Officer,
ompany "E", 1st Armored Regiment.
The company was reorganized a month
before the battle of El Guettar. There was a
question of how it was going to work out . It
did quite well, better than I thought.
On the 31st of March I was called to
Headquarters at 11 :30 and was told that we
would attack at 12 :30. I had no time for
reconnaissance, only to locate gaps in the
mine fields that we had to go through, but
I had time to tell the platoon leaders the order.
The attack started on time and we came
under heavy artillery fire - when we went
through the mine field . After that- we got
nothing until we reached the top of a ridge
near the objective. A platoon leader was
-wounded. I led his platoon up cautiously and
got a little small arms fire. One of the tanks
got too fast and was knocked out . Later, when
we reached the objective, one of the other
platoons lost a tank also . After accomplishing
our mission, we took a defensive position and
began to fire on 88-mm guns that could be
/LATER V/E W S A T THE rR ONT
seen from our position . I think we knocked
out 4 guns and several vehicles that could be
seen on the road below, also a tank .
One German gun was hit at 3500 yards .
We fired at a lower level, estimated the elevation,
and hit it .
Although we have had air burst 20 to 25
feet off the ground, we were not hit . Lucky,
I think; air bursts are more frightening than
dangerous.
a
a
a
e
STAFF SERGEANT WILLIAM HAGLER, ompany
"E", 1st Armored Regiment.
I saw a German Mark IV tank and an
American M4 tank fire at the same time once,
and both caught fire .
A tank has its place in a • counter attack
where the enemy hasn't had time to place
antitank guns. They are also most useful in
the retreat of the enemy, but they are expensive
to make an attack with against a well organized
position. I believe that our losses in
personnel are light in comparison with our
tank losses . For tank losses of 8 we lost:
4 men killed.
1 crew of 5 missing.
7 men and 1 officer wounded .
a
a
a
a
LIEUTENANT PARKER, 2nd Battalion, 1st
Armored Regiment, Reconnaissance Officer .
You told them all about it . We just walked
into a trap at Sidi bou Zid. I was on the right
flank. We passed through the Regimental
Reconnaissance Platoon . We had artillery to
our right rear. No one told us that they were
coming through. I think I was the first one to
give them the word that they were coming .
They came out of the hill southwest of Sidi
bou Zid. I gave the warning, but our people
didn't do anything that I know of . Then I got
the artillery observer . The tanks were then
300 yards away. I know of only 3 artillery
shells that fell on our right. I lost my recon-
33
naissance car and came out in a peep that
night. I brought 9 men out with me .
I can't understand why there was no artillery
fire, as the tanks were perfect targetsmassed
30 feet apart. Possibly no communication.
The Germans clean the battlefield of
everything. At Medjes-el-Bab the Germans
cleaned up, after darkness, only 800 yards
away. We found only burned out tanks and
wheels the next morning. The German recovery
crew was joined by the returning tank
crews, who signal each other with flares . The
tank crews assisted die recovery crews in locating
and pulling in damaged equipment .
The Germans also use flare signals in locating
stuff at night .
We got one of the boys back yesterday
that was burned and had been in the hospital .
He got burned in the battle of Sbeitla-SERGEANT
REE E.
SERGEANT HAGLER: He is a good boy. His
nose was peeled like a cherry when we took
him out. He has lots of guts .
I had to wait a week for some tank
clutches and spark plugs and had to rush like
hell before this move from Faid . Last night
was the toughest road march I ever made .
LIEUTENANT PARKER: It's embarrassing to
have to go up for information under fire and
then have to go back under fire and then go
up for more information again. The most
favorable place to hide is in the defilades to
get the information.
SERGEANT HAGLER : Spare parts we get
now by robbing the battlefields . Engines are
pulled in the maintenance 10 or 12 miles to
the rear .
At present, sir, the clothes I have on are
all that I have. I wash them in gasoline and
they dry in about 5 minutes .
a
a
a
a
rA N / E R 5 / N TUN / 5 / A
and taken to the rear. I am confident that
reconnaissance would have saved those two
tanks. The light tanks followed us around .
At Smitty's farm at Medjez-el-Bab on
- December 10th, Germans packed mud on the
turret§ o€ 'their Mark -IV -tanks- ,to make' them -
look like our M4 tanks . Our own foot reconnaissance
picked this - up and we were ready
for. it: Out. position . was, of stationary disguised -
artillery : We waited - until the Mark IV's were•
within 800 yards, then opened fire . We got
five Mark IV's, one of our M3 tanks being
used by the Germans, and one German motorcyclist
in a United States Army combat suit .
We found only three guns. The German tanks
were carrying shock troops.
PRIVATE HABAR, Headquarters ompany, 1st
Armored Regiment.
All the clothes I have, I've got on, sir . I
.lQousatr ttehrem arsetsetr wthweon I was driving for the
months ago. . I wash
fatigues-:in gasoline and boil Underclothes with.
GI soap.
o
a
.a
STAFF SERGEANT. . WILLIAM- •- HAGLER om=.
pany-"E", 1st Armored Regiment.
. -
At Medjez-el-Bab there was little or no
reconnaissance. Our infantry attacked in the
morning. One platoon of tanks was supposed
to follow the right flank, and it was supposed
to be protected by another platoon. We had
no reconnaissance other than our own on foot.
We :-walked-the .taoks. in: ~We Iiad -no--oraers'`--At- El : (n~ltarQ
on 31-- N6ich--. 1943 -1 - was
lithe== than to-await a :taink .attac'k M- a follow= : :pprroo.tecting : the. 'company.':- coma ander's ' left'
morning' shout - 0900 hours' we lost two
: flank:- -His platoon lost' one -, vehicle. from 88
tanks to the .88-nim :guns . The first was the
fire. 'He-knocked ,out one 88. By looking
'd - t.ank I :went forward- to-- get' the • = -- -through- my -glassed;- 1.' saw .= it• "roll 'oveii: - I
- rew and lost' my.tank 'by tli ee: 88-nim :gun: knocked one:motorcyclist .off his cycle with•a-.
hits:- Subset ueritly the: entire- coma and .'tank - 4S; caliber; pistol; and :.broke his-' hip,. •I made -:
rew ,was. lost by mortar-fire' ;1- vvas'wounded-
-) im crawl to= me° andse rrehed`hun - .but-found
M10 TD emplacement looking toward Faid Pass . This TD crew had worked day
and night to dig two such emplacements in the stony soil
34
/NTERVIEWS AT THE FRONT
0
a
0
0
APTAIN A. R. MOORE, ompany "F", 1st
Armored Regiment.
The M 10's look good to me ; all the boys
who drive them swear by them. They use
them hull down in defilade, nose over .
We lost 4 vehicles to Teller mines . Around
on the other side of the hill there were antitank
guns 3 mile in depth .
At present we have a few super shells
saved for a special occasion .°
OLONEL TALBOTT: Often we can't tell
whether vehicles are ours or theirs . Once
when the 2nd Battalion had three tanks left
and the 3rd Battalion had six, and we were
fighting a delaying action, we couldn't determine
whose lanks were re where. By- holding'
our fire we let"Jerry occupy a- ridge.'
I prefer maps to photos. It all simmers
dowh-to the fact $hat . you can't beat that. per- . "
.sonal'reconnaissance.'
-
1ST LIEUTENANT HARRY T. HOLTZMAN,
ompany "D", 1st Armored Regiment,
Krerouf, 11 April 1943 .
nothing. Heavy artillery fire was going on
with air bursts-I was in a sweat . One crew
of my platoon abandoned its tank, which had
been hit. Later the company commander, 1ST
LIEUTENANT BORESH, with a driver, .went
.back under fire. and: recovered the tank. I sawa
cyclist:getting away and thought him-to be
a .messenger, so I shot a super HE just ahead
of : himi and' he ran into the' burst, Pretty eicpensive
shot,- but : he "was..out of :30- caliber
range.
Afterwards we assembled, gathered the
wounded, and came out by a roundabout
route. I was covering the retreat. I saw a gun
crew running to their gun and gave them four
supers. They got in the way and we went on. - This battalion tried twice to crack the pass
We cam_ a to a s itie. Meld at dark. We bedded east of El Guettar. The start for Gabes was
iio
nd - oveii on at dayli t r r
made top' late .: The: first day. sue: Teached .: a _
.. -:mine field at :dark andtackt•o sPtop ; "You ca t
operate tanks aftei:-dark. without" ._lh_fantry fn `J
front: -
The second trywtte:were`the third of tlzr~ee ;
GENERAL
portant thing foi• a tanker to kndw?
• : '.":S"ERGEAKT - . IiAGLERi, .Eve iiig:. .EveYv
= man: must 'know his job-and- the'- tank con: companies-l: put-one platoon in front arid two
' mander _: mitst :Iiiow 'them :-all: The: giost Jm- in..:reserve" .to . meet'-88-mm---guns' or° counted' . =
portaiit -thing. T have learned -he' - is' tlte' Ger-. attack: .-.This "is best-. :to":ptit - platoons' ;in• The - -
man -eriiployment in-depth'- ,of -antitank :guns.
. formation..which can_ best .be: controlled. ,This
In tarik :versus -tank, o,tir 1VI4's'can bindle them
iS' epen ent on.--terrain . •==Give ?e - .platoon -~
.two to, one, ._and- everyone here': will;_#ell yoii' : .leader'-Iris objective =sector 'ands the:.pos tion,. :
the- sane: We're .iearning. The last battle, El
of the- . i+otnpany -commander and of :other-
Guettar, went better than the one before (Sidi
platoons, and let him work to the objective as
bou Zid) . When going into a battle where
you expect to lose 10 tanks, take 25 extra .
35
*NOTE: Maintenance became the subject of
the conversation . Everyone talked at once and earnestly
about 'salvaging' spare parts from abandoned
vehicles. The scribe could not keep up . Talking
about a race to get to a certain abandoned, disabled,
American tank, one exclaimed, ' hrist, someone beat
me to that one; homelite gone, radio gone, we had
tried to beat the Ordnance to it, damn it .'
Another stated, 'My crews go back with the
tanks to the Ordnance and they keep a guard with
a Tommy gun posted to see that no one gets away
by mistake with even a single wrench from it . We
have to have all our equipment and the men look
out and see that they do have it and don't lose anything.
What good is a tank that doesn't have a
crank or gun sight?'
rA N 14 E R 5 / *V TUN / s / A
best lie sees fit . Keep in contact by radio. The
old teaching of over-running antitank guns is
impossible here; 88-mm guns are almost
always protected by tanks, mines, and other
antitank guns .
My .-tactics in •and' -attack:'-'Platooriin-- in- .
verted wedge to proceed when it sees fit .
Move c.autio-usly ompany- commander be- -
hiird company--working from observafion - post .
to observation post, even up to 100 yards from
leading platoon.
During this attack on the Pass protected
by the mine fields the tanks had to proceed
in column through the mines. The Germans
let the entire company go through the mines .
Ope- tank was lost. by fire from -a Mark- IV.
tank :but thee remainder pressed'on.: ' -
Having gone :#hrough ••the -mine-field' I- •engaged
a Mark IV tank :-The description of the .
: :engagemefw . .wilj' d6dibn'strate, some of. t -
'Germais' tactics-afidsomer'of=ours : •The .- er=---:
:mans. -opened' f.:ile ftc*m - a ,weft .cainoGllaged'-
position 200(f- yards.'on the flank,.. with, a
:'77-inrn gun; supporting' artillery fired -an :.-air
_-burst to keep--the-tank-buttoned-up- ;itrd'thus`
obsettre-vision: I was able:to observe.the.flath
:- Immediately we turned this tank, which -had .
been caught from the vulnerable flank, head
into the gun, thus placing the heaviest armor
towards the enemy. The enemy's shot was
short . I began to back up, the only thing to
do when caught in the open . After I reached
better ground, the German and I both started
maneuvering against each other among the
low hills. Finally I caught the German coming
around a hill the correct range to which I had
already found by firing two rounds of high
explosive ammunition. My first round of
armor piercing ammunition immobilized him .
I fired several more into his Mark IV tank .
I-le did no more damage. We expended altogether
18 rounds on his tank.
36
Our tank track had been hit twice and
the tank was limping . Jerry always picks a
command tank . When you are being shelled
by indirect fire, as we were then from 88-mm
guns, -keep moving in a circle_ to throw -his
range and deflection- : off.-
,
In the meanwhile a second platoon had
come up -as requested -of OLONEL . TAL-
_-BOTT by.. me, and. got into position to -do . in---
direct fire. The 88-mm guris were spotted at
6000 yards. The platoon began to fire high
explosive ammunition, semi-indirect fire (by
guess and by God), and dumped in 200
rounds. Results were not clear. In the meanwhile
a platoon of M10 tank destroyers had
arrived; Then--two' .Gennan Mark II . tanks ap-
`peared ;rcear the kxio&ed~-dirt,-Mark:-1;V tank. i
'-'hey wered.estroyed by me tire .of the -tank
destroyers .-anii- of- our:. tanks.
'Suggestions. .on training :
An:officer . ie a -school teacher.. before -aria
during'.eombat.-. .
Talk .constantly'osier the -radio to the - men .
ygu lead ,
: : -
..Most -oI-.the 1st •Ariiiored' Division is well -
tramed, . but-= one . must keep : reminding them
of their training .
During our training we jump from one
thing to another too much . This is thought to
hold interest, but really accomplishes nothing .
We need longer, more interesting periods .
Men who have been in combat want more
training.
The major training subjects we need are,
first, all kinds of gunnery .
In small arms we stress too much correct
--position and range procedure . We need training
under combat conditions at longer ranges
and especially `pot shots' and fire and movement
combined.
INTERVIEWS AT THE TRONT
OLONEL TALBOTT: Our tanks were the
April 1st, the men were caught outside of the
only moving targets available . Men fired at
tanks.
the tanks rather than at towed targets .
Everyone in the Armored Force should
LIEUTENANT HOLTZMAN: In teaching tac- be able to drive a tank properly . Everyone
:tics-the Jerrain.board training is most valuable. . should- be. able .' to do :everyone else's job so- - :
We- made a -board of -the .Sidi - bou'Zid battle that he -can-carry on iunder - casualties. . : The -
area and reviewed ours and the enemy's move- higherr gears on a tank. are seldom used in
merits . The--terrain board : need not- be elaboz- combat. ' One gear is used during approach
ate ." Give students model tanks," give 'the pfa- and attack:. : : Slowly `-moving, dustless .tanks
toon leaders objectives, and let the entire crew
have a terrifying aspect.
solve problems . Give the situation and let
LIEUTENANT Mc RA KEN: At Sidi bon
them dope it out.
Zid, slowly moving German tanks were at the
If you run into one of the 88-mm guns,
proper place at the proper time . Our downthere
will be two more . You can't crush those
pointed mufflers raise much dust. Jerry's
antitank guns . They are employed in depth
exhaust points up. "-
ariii'are.-protected b~ mit~ies,.tattks ;:and~ mailer .
arttitar) OLONEL =7it1LBOTTi We have.no leatne3'
guns . . . ?en an
-mm
is--
"loeated ; leave one'-tank-ttoo engage ilE .and send -_ to _move Over norma~l .dry.bunch=grass terrain-
- :the rest of" .the platoon-to the flanks.-to .locate
without dust.
'.other'-
ns, : =These antitank" :.'guris-~ fire - e~-
During-the--February 15th' Sidi -lsou lid
wployed -in depth
-with-88-mmguns"
in the, - :battle; : part- of our reconnaissance- trapped -on-_ .
rear: The 88~mm uns- .open fire,..first; draw--- ' top `of Lessouda-rloiintain o served iitistless -
. ing the - tank.: "comman er-s attention . - e
German tanks creeping at very -low speed, for ..
tai* -_will-, make Uns .:gun-.-his •-pbjec#ive -Mid -
many hours- tQ-..reach`,-proper ositioiY:-fix
'if possible, advance. op -it, until he "-is caught surprise9ttack. , .
from -the flanks by 47=mm--guns and/or tanks .
;Radio. nstruction shodld .get' #o the; pit
Tanks will draw our armor towards the 88-mm
where every ordinary soldier can check and
guns. Solution at El Guettar was to send
use every set. Procedure is important. No
two reserve platoons to the flanks and call
extra chatter . Everyone in the company can
for artillery support .
operate sets .
At El Guettar no high ground was avail- German planes will wheel overhead and
able to artillery observers . Tankers did ob- pretend to `peel off', thus attracting attention
serving for from one to five battalions at one of the ground troops. While this distraction
time. I would have every man in the bat- is taking place, German tanks will attack the
talion a forward observer able to give initial flanks. We call this the `Smith Brothers' Act .
data and adjust fire.
0
0
0
0
Try to arouse interest in learning first
aid. The most valuable asset when a tank is
SERGEANT LASLEY, ompany " ", 1st
hit is to know the use of sulpha powder and
Armored Regiment, Maknassy, 4 April 1943 .
pills and the treatment of burns, puncture
I have been • a tank commander for eleven
and laceration wounds. In a JU 88 bombing
months off and on. I have seen action at
37
r N / E R S / N TUN / 5 / 4
Faid Pass and also in two or three small acused
one of our captured vehicles as a decoy.
tions involving only artillery shelling .
They get you in, and then they give it to
I ran the tank by interphone . Once in a
you.
while we have trouble with the interphone . At Faid we were on a plateau . It was
When . it goes Out,, I, do the best I van ; . I dark. . We - .were . firing, on the move, . at
holler . to tie gunner;' hehlIers 'to the "assist : • •lfashes . -We were too close--to-the'.artillery. :-
ant driver.
So we backed away and fired on the move .
I fired individually and picked my own We used a stabilizer, firing at a range of 300
'target . The platoon leader did not designate to 400 yards. Finally our tank was hit with
the target .
-
an 88-mm shell. It was the third shell which
finally destroyed the tank . The first two
Our practice has generally been to move bounced off . When the third hit, the tank
from place to place under the direction of caught fire immediately . . The shell landed
the platoon leader, who used the radio . One on the floor of the tank. Shrapnel went into
section covered the movement of the other the hull and on the floor. I believe the am- j
as well as they could. But we were afraid munition caught fire first, then the gasoline. f
to fire too much- on the flanks _for .fear -of hit
We all got -outt except .:one man. -__When wej
tmg. oitr-own .tan1cs :': . left the' Wk it was• s• till running - baekwgrds: J
The Geicnaia. tactic is . to =try to mako : it..-' in_reverse.: We started to run toward our. own i
luck - easv: ' They draw you in.: :. :They even
lines.
38
What a German Mark III Tank looks like against
the background of North African terrain
as
AMrERVicws Ar THE TRo#r
As long as we have as much equipment
the Germans, we can match them.
We had armor piercing ammunition when
we needed it.
When you are fired upon, . if you .have a
-good? tank -like fan ' M4;: -'you. "" 'to find . out
where the enemy is and -fire even before you
find a good position . Of course, it is best
to get under cover as soon as .you can. When
-fired on, you should get out of the fire area,
find cover, and then fire.
You should go from one firing position . to
another as a platoon . But at times we must
go on our own. Sometimes you must act on the mountains to the east. We fired
your own because you can see the ground we had orders to pull out and go back, to
that you are going on better than. the platoon Sidi bou-.Zid. . We . went back -and .remained -
leader. i tl ere.:.'- Ta s . i~ept =coming,We pulled -out 'T'he driver:acid-assistant"driver'should s And. ,were -met- by - a--fine . 6f=:tanks-=from• :.-.the
-silt- iii picking :out' targets . - They:cari- be ozr - southwest .:. That's where we -lost''four other,
-the alert and pick out-targets _that :the gunners :-tanks; including : our- tank We.were fired- on.
ant see.- . :
.
Mb-.ayr'k .VI tanka: and':88-mm :uns, =Our
We also 'lost : a' tank -. when :comiing :back in _ - tank -was_ flit :in .the •:tiirret .: : It listed- and -
to ~Sid.i --dbiodi,l •_:The motor stopped andWe caught: on:fire I -.believe it vas a .Mark"'.Vt . I
couldii't- . -further.:' :Wee'-e*brut 'didn't
tank:whichhitus:=
1
..=-d-esitroty- because-we-thought the Ainedcans :. . We:all got out :,of the.. tank. .t.-aannkd lay in'
w
1 e:
.
aagain::
:ake': it over -went. .mto-ould
''
ditcl 'all night.'wh' e . :Gerinan:' tanks : : .as ed;. :
tAwn. Then our -Avompany, !.cowman er sen ... :: .us : :'I en :we werit~ ,mtb."- e(-mountains .-ana`-
Us:back :to. destroy. the tank: - .
`walked" -to - Kasserine :' We lived with 'the-
Arabs and ate their food and water .
What I've learned here in Africa is that
it is important to respect, not fear, the 88-mm
guns. You must keep in turret defilade. They
can knock you out at 3000 yards . I have
also learned that tanks must have support .
If we had air and infantry we could have
done a good job. If the infantry had -been
ahead of us at the Pass, they could have
helped quite a bit.
We had an M4 tank . It worked OK .
We should have plenty of reconnaissance .
We will have a much better chance if we
know what we are doing .
0
0
0
0
I have a good, well-trained crew. One
is from the 2nd Armored Division, the others
from 'I' ompany.
The M4A2 seems to be a swell tank .
0
0
0
0
SERGEANT NEAL, ompany "I", 3rd Battalion,
1st Armored Regiment, Maknassy, 4 April
1943.
I am a platoon sergeant. In the action at
Sidi bou Zid I was the driver for the platoon
leader .
During the first week we were near Sidi
bou Zid guarding the Pass . We were equipped
for indirect firing . All of our tanks were in
the vicinity of the Pass-set back about 5 or
39
6 miles. We'd come within 2000 yards of
the Pass every morning, fire into the Pass, and
pull back . We were just back of Lessouda
Mountain.
On the morning in question, we were _inthe.
.cactus paten% southeastt of= Sidi .bou: Zid . -'H
We got up and* bid- orders to -be on the alert .
Suddenly we saw firing where `G' ompany
We fired -back. It -lasted one hour .
Then we pulled up towards- the north and
along the road in line formation . At this
time hell broke loose and we continued to
fire. When we first opened up the targets
were hard to see . Then we saw firing from
was.
until
rNk E#Q5 /N TUN/5 / .4
something which you think worth firing upon,
take the chance . The function of the officer
is to keep the men together and tell them what
is going on. The soldier has to use his individual_
judgment.
-You should keep your trbops., on the alert .
always, ready for quick movement .
At Faid we were too close to the Pass .
We didn't get a chance to man_ euver. They
came around on the left and cut us off in
retreat . We ran through the German lines
and up into the mountains . Most of the company
did likewise. We were pretty much
depleted.
SERGEANT BUTLER, ompany "I", 1st Armored
Regiment, Maknassy, 4 April 1943 .
I was the tank commander of a medium
tank. We did reconnaissance work . I was in
action at . Faid Pass .
At Faid everyihing-was vague. - We didn't
have enough information concerning where
the enemy was . If we could get correct information
in this respect, we :.could- do . a
better job.
For example : (pointing to a map) When
we first moved up here (southeast of Sidi
bou Zid) we were told that there would be
one 105-mm gun and several 88-mm guns, and
that is all. Thenn we went on a reconnaissance We have plenty of artillery here now . In--
(north .,qf- Sidi , boa- Zid) - and found many fantry; should be used for reconnaissance up .
Heavy 'mortais aiid .ground . guns; probably
inountaiii$, -etc: =
=
° -
47:mm•guo . This-was in .-the;Paj;s. When-we a-
'--left and tried'to'get -out we avere-attacked'liy- LIEUTENANT OLONEL -.RINGSOK;- 6th Ar: -
ivlessersclimitts•..and $t~k~s. .Tliis.shbws =that - :: mored Infantry,.-.:and-.-members of-- his ;.$af-'
tliee'iGma-ia;irnad ground• forces ice well. talion,' 14 April' 1
coordinated:- Finally we, got . out and--with=
-:
:drew to the vicinity of-Sidi--boa Zid: '. :We were
It is. recommended -tliat each :33attaliori br:'
told that we'd -.have an alert- the next --lay .
Unit:' ommander nave a mounted radio (5107''
heyaeemed tQ -kriov~ something was .-going
on. a :: ton uehielexo. be used in-reconnai sanee
._J6 bapp~en but hey didn`t -know:what, Then an"
to-keep contact wrfh' his -company com
Oter : the firewor'l~s scarfed . we went towards rrk4nders: • Reconnaisgancesshould `be -as -com-.•~
the -oasi's along the North road . Mytank was plete-'as possible. . --It the- enemy Brie is 600
the point, in support of the colonel. We yards distant, reconnaissance should go up 558
were told to pull off the road because we had
yards away.
been fired upon. Here is where we lost most
The 34' ton vehicle can go almost any place
of our tanks, because we pulled off the road
that a man can . When the terrain becomes
and stopped . I believe that tanks should
such that the peep cannot be used, the 510
keep on moving, even if slowly . Thus, for
can be dismounted to make a 509, and comexample,
the other day we were in a scrap
munication continued. I strongly recomnear
the bridge. We tried moving around
mend the above.
and didn't get hit at all.
The Germans will infiltrate into our line
The tactic we use is to have one section and stay there all day, firing the machineof
the platoon advance while the other sec- pistol indiscriminately . He may not havetion
covers it .
a target but he does it for the nervous effect
I'd say one must act on his own a great it produces on us . Our defense for that is to
deal of the time. You can't wait to be told have each platoon do a mopping up job until
when to fire or where to fire . When you see
it contacts the adjacent units and the area is
40
/NTERVIEWS AT THE I IZONT
borrow from the British, and we fired them
all night at Jerry. Now we take flares with
us and fire them at Jerry at night. We do
this on all the nights that we don't use them
for signals, then we use them only for sig- .
.-_pals. . But• my-•'men now pay no attention to
the enemy flares .
We were taught to fire the ground signal
projector and white illuminating flares to
mark front lines, but they will light up our
area 200 yards square and will show the
enemy our position rather than show us his .
They should be shot out in advance of our
positions and fired so that we are in the dark
and the-enemy is illuminated .
cleared of such people . We use the selfpropelled
37-mm gun on . the carrier to . do
this and take in prisoners. We back it up
and fire canister into the holes when we find
the Germans.
.
The Germans will beeome discouraged by
continuous firing of weapons. It is terribly
annoying to them . So now, throughout the
night, we have members of the squads take
turns' at firing the machine guns . It also helps -
keep the men awake and on the jobs . At no
set time, but off and on and many times during
the night, the guns are fired .
Something else to consider is the ease
with which you can use indirect firing with
the machine gun . Indirect firing can be most-
APTAIN D. A. KERSTING: Need to know -
':advantageously.used.and* it does not. need :o.-; ; - . .hover ,to' o ierate alb beapoiis:
be made* -complicated We , simply . o out : =
;where sees and fire,-and..make .recordr '= -'. OLONEELL.. RINGSOK: In battle,- •the„first
of it on .stakes ,:and, at-night when we wish.to
- time .men are under fire;' issue some kind of - I
.;:fixe a,, certain°distance,- we; just ;elevate :to . tlte:•- - - order -give:-'them .sorriething `toc o
d takedesired
height as shown --oni =the 'stake: ;We
::-their attention. - :
were -:using -indirect _ firing one : night . to` good
advantage : when: we . were. :firing:on • a:'road:
Evidence was seen the next morning•- whenn
we savd:-a •buck°~btirnF on:'tlie `i4ad.' ,The
firing•.'cart .a~s~pply .~ioad ..fhree miles:au~y _t~:..-.~ -
- The German flares and night sigrials'.gave
my battalion a lot of trouble at first . The
Germans fire flares continuously all night
long, mostly to annoy and disturb troops . My
troops, at first, would cease firing and attempt
to G-2 what the enemy meant. But really,
in most instances, it didn't mean anything but
was meant to distract the troops . And it will
distract them unless you teach them to pay no
attention to it, but to continue the battle and
fire flares in return. After all, you can't do
anything after the flare is fired .
We fire lots of flares in the battalion now,
and when Jerry fires at us, we fire in return .
I got my men used to the German flares
by getting all I could, including those I could
' . -. APTAIN*' KERSTING: Need battle - inocu-'
labors -
i~eecJ : -,good. 'obstae1e . :cou se-..4rammgIn..:
the $tates .'-
4 1
SERGEANT FRANK SABIN, Headquarters ompany,
2nd Battalion, 6th Armored Infantry,
14 April 1943 .
Dig good foxholes . We learned in Sbeitla
Valley that foxholes offered smaller area
and less chance of getting hit by bombs and
shrapnel
I wish I had learned in the States to have
a lot of real fire over my head . We got
scared awfully at first. Any kind of firing
over your head would help. It would still
pay if you lost one or two men when you considered
whole armies .
I had rather go in my peep than walk
when on reconnaissance.
T NK ER5 /N TUN/5
Flares keep the Germans guessing . Don't
shoot them over the front lines of a troop .
Shoot 200 or 300 yards in front of our front
line troops so it lights the enemy .
The first time I went through crossed
machine gun fire, OLONEL RINGSOK
taught me to use my head . I went through
it 12 . or 14 times . I also led 8 or 12 men
through. The way to. do it is to crawl- and
see where they, hit, --then either cross to the
right or to the left . Just look and use your
head.
As soon as they fire fall flat on the
ground, and when they reload jump up and
run while they do . Experience and guts
count, faulty leadership hurts.
the next leader go down .
They didn't teach terrain in the States.
The colonel teaches me the terrain and the
enemy situation .
The battalion commanding officer and the
commanding officers of the companies do
better when they make reconnaissance . Seems
like the battalion does 100% better when they
do.
All men in the ommand Post should be
ready for rear-guard action . They should
have holes dug in just like the men in the
front lines in case of envelopment .
The driver should be ready no matter
what happens. Should know all guns, etc .
42
Back in the States they didn't teach that,
but we have to know it here .
In garrison I didn't care so much for work,
but I do here. I don't mind it here .
There should always be a stragglers' post .
A sergeant could collect the stragglers and
send them back. At 'first we didn't have a
straggler's post and we had men and vehicles
-150 miles back. OLONEL. RINGSOK: once.
collected a bunch of artillery stragglers and
gave them rifles and we had a big battle.
If we stay there and fight the Germans
will back up.
New men aren't well trained . I had a
hard time when I was first in the front lines.
I was gun shy, scared. New men should work
themselves"in. . -They shouldn't be in too big
-.a,-hurry. They must be. cautious.
Get.men who have _been in .action, ..change -
things that inen... don't . need,';and- aeach slit
- trench, teach .gum positions acid -how to -shoot
al1-guns. .Teach machine gun position, which
we'.dtdn't'earn .to make.:
SERGEANT GEORGE . LELAND, ompany,'D!,.- -
Our battalion - _ officers -. and -.nOnvcoinmis-
6th A onored- Infantry, . hear:Si+di-bou -Ziil, 14
siooed officers. .'are- :good_ in .-bittlq. .;Tb.-ser- ' -
= . .: . .
geant Look over -the officers' jobs and the eor- - . W.hoeini=.-push_ the enemy back: the•
pQrals took rover':..:.' sjertgoe-hanbtes's:;.: We ground . between . - your ; position -.. .and : the
': did"( learn the' -organization ~ •of:.the battalion - .--. enemy`s.' position' -_• should: be; ' checked - or
in. $ie States : --We, learneii' it here 'end now snipers;:' I : hink =patrols =should • be -equipped
everyone knows -where he `should go should -
_additional- fire- power .
The hardest thing for my squad to do is
stay together .
Men in the States should be 'trained to
dig foxholes. It will save lives . Foxholes
are better than slit trenches because they
protect a man more and you can fire out of
a foxhole and you can't very well out of a
slit trench .
If I went to the States to train men, the
first thing I would stress to a new man is
leadership . I would make the man have
confidence in his leader, and train him in
every weapon, camouflage, and to dig foxholes;
also to cover up tin cans. (Tin cans
reflect light and give away positions .)
INfERV/EW5 AT THE r"RONT
If you are going to harden a soldier up,
keep him hardened up and don't let him get
soft. Start hard training and keep it up . Men
should be hardened before they go into combat.
Physical training on a boat is fine, but
weapon training is wasted.
Flares should be used at night to confuse
the enemy. They are very effective. You
should also fire . machine guns .-at, night even
if you don't see the, enemy. =It - has. a. very
effective demoralizing effect on the enemy .
In the States we didn't have enough night
training. Men should be trained in the use
of stars for navigation. All men should be
trained to know organization in the States.
The half-tracks carry- enough ammunition .
-Peeps shoirld-.have- trailers to' oarnyAj~imuni=
:quarters= ompany - 2nd - .- a a on, - .6th- .:,Arniored
Infantry, 14 A:pril'-1943
-The`--75-mm. howitzer is :-good . for Mafk
Ills 'and III's. We. .got 'three : German - :tanks'
with : high explosive- axnnitini#iofiir and 'one --.-
lucky- shot-got a )4ark I.;;
:-
- 'Ifl 'a- bomblng attack;-don t try to'Yun' '-too
far from your half-track. Go about 20 or 30
yards and then hit the dirt.
I found at Maknassy that too many men
stand around the observation point and give
the position away . We lost a man in a counterbattery
fire that way . At El Guetter we had
the only other counter-battery fire .
We have the most need for training in the
.30 and .50 caliber machine guns. We have
men who don't even know their nomenclature
and functioning .
OLONEL RINGSOK: Many recruits have
never fired .30 or .50 caliber machine guns
or driven half-tracks .
_
43
SERGEANT MAHONEY: Training in bivouac
is good . It keeps men from being lazy.
It keeps them refreshed on nomenclature .
Not all our men could read a compass or
a map. Our new officers are medium good
and good.
There should be a oleman stove in each
half-track to heat food . They would not give
our position away like open gas flame does .
Assaolt.gmi platoons -should be taught -the
use of .air bursts . We also need fuse setters.
We have improvised some, but they are too
slow for fire for effect .
The half-tracks have taken a beating, but
they're OK.
We should have had - some training inbooby
--traps . Don't pick up things: Watch -
where you.- step: Stay . in . half-track when
posse e : -
I don't--think the recruit training 'is tough -
enough. Tie -new . men= .re -too -soft. --The-
•
more framing,-'-the -better. We :need:::harder- -
training.right-now so :we wont- get-scift. . :'
Eveiy. man should know hove--to -fire,every:':
gum-- in. -the'- battalion= and be able to operate
.the-radio. A:man' doesn't need .toa• know=fuiic=. '
tiptning o •.too•.rm ch ;nomenclature-mast-know -.
'how to. clear -dams.'-
OLONEL RINGSOK: Before an action, we
assemble the squad and platoon leaders and
give them the `big picture .' When the platoon
commanders become casualties, 30% were at
El Guetter, there is no one to give them the
big picture then. And it helps to know who
is on your right and left and what they are
doing . This class, I believe, has paid big
dividends .
0
0
0
Q
2ND LIEUTENANT KENNETH D . WARREN,
Headquarters ompany, 2nd Battalion, 6th
Armored Infantry .
Some of our replacements have been
riflemen only. We need men trained in the
tion_-frotri •half•tr2tcks- to - the
SERGEANT - JOHN D. ` MAHONEY, Head- ;
T N K ER5 /N TUN/5
machine gun and in the 37-mm gun. The
replacements we got in the States knew their
weapons better than those we got since we've
been here. We have had to train most of
our mortar men . None knew the 75-mm gun .
I'm convinced that we have the finest
weapons. . The 37-mm gun is good. Against
personnel close in use canister . The armor
piercing is good for tankss at close. range.
On replacement training-h don't"know
how you can introduce men to the shock of
battle. When you are being overrun is the SERGEANT PUDIMAT, ompany "E", 6th
time training counts .
Armored Infantry, Sidi bou Zid, 14 April 1943 .
At Medjez-el-Bab where we were being
overrun, no one knew what was going on.
fear, but with caution . The mortar must be
Regarding • this shock of - battle, how are
fired approximately. 400 • yards behind .. lines
you',gomg .to trarrr :tneA . to: me ,. rS
ur
an in. . e _ a e. -
company was in;.a fkre .fight;- and tanks which :
I placed 'an .•81-mm mortar approxunately'
had by passed them overran -themn from the
'20 yards m front of our lines during' the:Kas--
_ . ._.serine'battle and wiped Out a G.ercmaon'm-.=
. : R_ eplacements - need more training *in amts: : . . ."mand -post and inflicted _150 cassia ties -on - the'
"We:have .infantryrrien :*lio'had-.never had any enep. . -If a- sound power "phone was' used
training in armored oi'ce.tactics, a axmore the 81-#Vri-mortar -'could be: moved- to :various -
infantry is ' a' lot different . :froirf' regular in- positions and communications could still be
Men-should- be trained :to
~ ~, . m-aa achirle-
'great . deal' of~Iicactice.?rs=needed,
gun; as we as thherirselves :
mach ne: grin .
scouting - and- patrolling:
that can be seen will draw fire just as a
vehicle will.
The enemy will shell you from his tanks
and he's good with his mortars too . Recruits
need general training, especially in how to
place and use their weapons.
OLONEL RINGSOK: We've had to run a
training center in our trains, and that's no
good.
We did more damage to the vehicles in
the 40 miles cross-country east of El Guettar
and the 70 miles coming out of Kasserine
than was done in all the other 4000 miles .
The men must be impressed with the importance
of taking enough ammunition and
44
other supplies every time they detruck .
They're too slow in detrucking . Equipment
must be ready at all times to detruck . Men
are too unwilling to leave the half-track-it
means they have to carry their own stuff.
We have enough equipment, but it's not
always in the proper place. At Medjez we
had to pull a short notice attack and it turned
out .that the men, were out in_ the' cold rain for
three days without Tair coats' or blankets . •
e
a
a
o
Weapons should not be regarded with
I have found that men make . use of terrain
for cover and concealment only when fired
upon.
LIEUTENANT OLONEL RINGSOK: At present
four officers are studying until midnight
to learn armored infantry tactics . These officers
were trained in . 'A' ompany of the
Maintenance Battalion.
a
o
e
o
APTAIN LAWREN E PUGH, ompany "D",
6th Armored Infantry, near Sidi bou Zid, 14
April 1943.
I believe that kitchen trucks should be
in combat trains. Maintenance should be
I/VTERV/EW5 AT THE FRONT
kept as close to the combat area as possible
so as to repair vehicles. Moving vehicles
back to Maintenance is very difficult . Maintenance
is most effective when close to the
combat area .
A scavenger truck should salvage parts
of knocked out vehicles before valuable parts
are ruined by :personnel knocking them off
with chisels and hammers. In this w-ay ye-,
hicles 'could be .-rebuilt iii - the field . I- sug- •
gest that one company be put in the maintenance
battalion to salvage parts . In this
way lots of valuable equipment could be
saved.
High velocity 37-mm armor piercing ammunition
is very effective on the sides of
Mark -IV tanks . . : Will, pierce- 2%-inches-, . of • -
•
steel 'At ' 5b0''yards` -
,_Armor :p rcmg :
-ammunition-'fork
7 im
-howitz2er, ,assa0ult- .guns-' very effective: . Gave '..•r-=-o1u3-tndtosh- -Armored- 3Regimpnt . and
"they -kfiocked outs-three Mark. IV tanks :
- :-The,=battalion :-like&' .to .be --led:into,, battle- -
:.andd not driven ..intdn
it. • -The.%battalion' com- -
ma-nding' officer and -the . -officers should lead .
45
Don't shoot at any plane except when attacked
. There should be no shooting at night
even if bombed .
All leaders should know compass reading
and terrain study thoroughly .
You should always drive without lights except
for blackout lights away from front lines .
Everyone should, know (1) how to : operate
. radio, (2)'maintenance of vehicles .
OLONEL RINGSOK: With regard to
wounded. Let the company aid men take
care of them . All others should continue
their mission . If they stop to take care of
the wounded it decreases the fighting strength
of the unit when it is neededd badly.
: ompanaiyd '-mnen. . should be-trainedas - .
other:.soldiers In :,-basic,arms and priacililes .
of the- unit so that :in- ease- they-'ever- haveto.':
fight: tfie wilklnowws methicigi
When' tactical firing' begins, --fhe :i0eri•-get"
:excited: • enist:t e time or officers .-to'-calinthem:'
-•That -•earl -be '.done= by" simply_`:Issuing
.an order or directive- such as . 'hit the ground', -!
-.:The-- Men'-have: coi}fidence: _ in,'them:-`.• If the :. ? .`follow;-anything to? -take?:.the :uten`vmit s .,
:-:.men feel: than;-they are;licked from liestart:':
off'-the-.shelling'- and gibe o.them ~snmefhrn -
they give: up easily: --
APTAIN D. A. KERSTING: Recruits need
There should be means of communication
much more night training before coming over .
I remember spending only 4 nights out in all
my night training, but here we spend 40
nights out of every 45 doing night work ; night
attack, night patrols, night outpost, etc . Night
training should not have to be learned here
when the men have to do it for record .
The organization of the unit should be
known thoroughly, not only by the leaders
but by the privates and by everyone else . You
should know what every person does . It
will also be good to know the organization of
your enemy . This is in addition to identification.
with supporting units, that is, peep to battalion
half-track, battalion half-track to supporting
units, and from supporting units to
their companies. Each battalion must have
a forward and a rear command post. The
battalion commanding officer should be with
the forward command post.
Frankness with your subordinate leaders
is the biggest thing in leadership. The officer
should be truthful . If he doesn't know,
he should admit to the noncommissioned
officers that he doesn't know all the answers
and that they must work it out together .
An officer can't fool an enlisted man .
r4N/< ERS
This hospitatwas. less than So-milttes_ :f rofm-rthoent':
German machine pun nests can be easily
located as -. they have :rocks .piled: : arotintl
the; .nesf•'to- foi~n a.'litkle mound. ' They.
never-- :out ' in- the . open . ._ The German sniper
is good tactically, but a poor shot. The Italian
rifle is no good, you must take Kentucky
windage. It is powerful and long range. The
German grenade is ineffective. It makes a
lot of noise but it does not have the power
that ours has.
Our rocket guns and rocket grenades scare
the German and Italian into surrender when
fired at night against personnel. They must
be fired so as to strike rocks and explode .
They have a terrific explosion and we find
them useful in that respect . Keep harrassing
the enemy by night firing and patrols. It
is awful on their morale and decreases their
efficiency .
You can't .i mtprhees,s organization of. the
battalion 'tour; much -in the States;.'. Let' them
;leax i -it :-there= rather than 1ia~ve to learn 'it
here, for it is absolutely • necessary that the
men know the workings of a unit when
leaders turn up missing in action and subordinates
take their places .
In the battle, initially the officers must
lead their men. If they see him going the
men will follow ; but when the battle starts
the officer should fall back to the rear . But
not too far in back-just back of the front
line (5 or 10 feet) so he can direct and maneuver
the troops . But initially he must lead.
Tank fire in support of infantry is much
more effective than artillery, as tanks can put
out pill boxes by direct fire and infantry will
advance behind them, whereas artillery is not
so accurate .
/N TUN /S / 4
46
INTERVIEWS AT THE FRONT
For physical condition climbing in and
out of half-tracks gives the necessary exercise
and teaches how to get out, too . It is much
better than a long hike . Make your men
shave each day, and keep clean . Provide
periods for washing and bathing and enforce
it. It is vital to morale and discipline .
The meaning of counter-signs should be
taught in guard duty back in the States . Also
how to challenge and ask for the counter-sign
in the dark should be taught.
Know your men. It is quite necessary
that officers know their men as completely
as possible. Know their faults, their weaknesses,
their strong points, and abilities . It
pays dividends to take a personal interest
in them.'
We' have a system •that- lias- • never failed
to -get our -battalion, . ready.-to move on time.
Our -scheme avoids disturbing- .and harcassing
the -troops: :untii-it :is tithe to . to something;- .
It gives -plenty of time- to get .'ready'to-move,-
and also to get t.he--orders down- to' every.man:. -:
We work,it:this way :- Z_have-a-good r.adio-in .
my peep, After I get' 'my orders :at. ombat-
' ommaucl . Headquafters,'.adas• .:soon_ as. I
leave ,there I _call :in-ab .the -battalion; 'Winit- -
up the 'phonograph, I have ' a fiewrecord- to -
play.' That Is the alert, the battalion gets set
to move, and the officers and all concerned
in the new orders assemble at battalion headquarters
and are waiting for me when I get
back.
( omment by APTAIN TIPTON )
One of the many interesting parts of our
visit to OLONEL RINGSOK's battalion was
the fine spirit and morale shown, the enthusiastic
leadership of officers and men, their
cleanliness and their military bearing.
OLONEL RINGSOK has three light tanks
in his reconnaissance unit . These are not in
the Table of Basic Allowances, but he finds
them invaluable in reconnaissance. He doesn't
47
go after big game with them, but uses them
to fire on good targets if necessary, and in
helping with the mission.
a
a
o
0
STAFF SERGEANT FRED W . ERDWINS, Headquarters
Detachment, 2nd Battalion, 6th Armored
Infantry.
I have never seen a man killed in a slit
trench, but I did see three men killed who
did not start digging as the others did . Entrenching
tools are very valuable and almost
as necessary as a man's arms .
a
a
a
e
PRIVATE BLAIR H . ONARD, 6th Armored Infantry.
In this. war there. is no. front . . The :enemy
may come from -the rear as tlie- enemy-'tanks i
did. to my .company. , We• saw : 'he- tanks :at ..
the rear, but thought they were our own.' One 1
half hour =later.'the, moved :up and shot :hell-••'
- out-:of. out-.halt-tracks:
- .SERGEANT - NORMAN -ANNENBERG: -Battalion:'_
-.nI adquarters, -3rd Battalion ; 6th. Armored -In-
#antsy, IVIaknassy ;-5 :April.1945
.At Kasserine ?ass, I was-with--the •Erig1f h
in -the command post of their tank commander.
The command post was well located
in a draw between two hills . Although the
command post was located between two artillery
fires-the fire of the enemy on one side
and the English fire on the other-none of it
came in to us . This was the situation from
the latter part of the morning until about
1600 hours. At this time, the English started
to build fires for cooking purposes . In addition,
the artillery observer and his assistant,
who were directing the English fire, came on
to the sky line and directed fire from there .
It wasn't more than fifteen or twenty minutes
before German artillery fire began to
land in the command post. As a matter of
TANK E,Q5 /N TUN /5 / A
fact, one shell landed directly in front of the
artillery observer and his assistant and killed
them.
About February 16th I was a member of
Battalion Headquarters, 3rd Battalion, 6th
Armored Infantry . Our battalion was part
of oin bat ommand ` '. On this day we
were proceeding across country towards Sidi
bou Zid for the purpose of engaging the Germans
who were then attacking. At intervals
during our journey we were attacked by German
planes. There were never more than
four planes at one time ; usually, only two.
Finally towards the late afternoon we neared
Sidi bou Zid . The companies of the battalion
thereupon commenced to go into position for
Don't use machine guns from tanks after
purposes of the action to follow . - By..this time
dark. They give your position away.
German -air activity-,had- ceased, so'. -far as At -El Guettar on 7 April 1943 we were
we were concerned . ' Just as, -the companies
given a mission to seek out and destroy ten
finished getting into position, however, a
Jerry tanks in a wadi. Our company had sixgroup_
of at least twenty German planes
teen tanks. On arrival we found only one
strafed and b_ ombed _us ."
German soldier and he had -no arms. He _
had . been . on reconnaissance . . - I took-him. and
About Febritaiy : l8fli ombat timctaand'
caused liim on the back of: ytank. .';: . .
itr particular, was"-fighting a'-withdrawing
actioii.at.:Sbeitla: All "during this actions- the
Our :secondary . mission' was to : rally at
_Germans kept . sending , planes over"-for the
the -junction o :Galie$=Kebili . Road ^W
ur. se of:- llama in those _.units. of arfis ofo
started. with : fivo ' latoo'i 'in :.the assatiItiiig : p
$ g -
p
units -'which were hampering their advance. line. We didn't know "what was -ahead. - I
came over a hill and found a Jerry tank with
a gun pointed straight at me at about 40 yards
range. For a moment I thought tears were
running down my legs . But the tank had
been abandoned and didn't fire .
Then came the wildest ride I ever had-
40 miles in six hours . We got another mission,
after we joined the British 8th Army,
of cutting a column on the Gum Tree Road .
So the wild ride continued . They finally
started putting artillery on us . Our troops
were advancing, but everything was mixed
up; tank destroyers, heavies, infantry, peeps,
half-tracks, and the combat command
commander - but most of the radios were
During the early part of the afternoon, the
Germans commenced to approach Sbeitla in
tanks. Our artillery fire, however, began
effectively to hamper their approach. Within
half an hour German planes had gotten after
the artillery.
O
O
o
O
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM S . NORMAN, ompany
"H", 3rd Battalion, 13th Armored Regiment,
near Sidi bou Zid, 14 April 1943 .
You won't get a Goddam thing done to
the tanks unless you do it yourself-and don't
delay doing it. Bring lots of brushes to clean
the guns.
48
Our supply of gas and ammunition has
been satisfactory, but the supply
get any sleep.
The most important lesson is not to worry .
Respect Jerry, but don't worry .
In platoon tactics dispersion
important factor, both on march
ouac.
men never
is the most
and in biv-
In training, get recruits used to sound of
artillery shells. Many men shiver and shake
and are terrified of artillery fire . But remember
when you hear the `freight trains'
coming, most of them aren't coming anywhere
near you.
INTER V1E W5 AT T11E • FRONT
out. We finally got there. We had advanced
unopposed across 21 miles of desert . The battalion
started with about 40 tanks ; when we
arrived at the objective only 8 were running.
The fall-outs were mechanical failures,
clutches, sprocket studs, etc., but we had not
had a maintenance halt since March 13th, and
this charge was on April 7th . We finally got
up and shot hell out of the road . Then we
groped our way back to the rallying point, out
of gas, ammunition, and hungry as well.
0
STAFF SERGEANT WILBUR R . WHITE, ompany
"H", 13th Armored Regiment .
Take more leads when firing at aircraft.
When under artillery fire, stay in your
tank-it's better than any foxhole.
Remember that every antitank gun is not
an 88. .
At El Guettar it's rough tank country . Our
objective was the base of. a mountain . The first
.platoon--was do the right- and : -the second*. On _ % with -ihtelsps
the left: I- was in.; the-rear in_ - reserve: =If we had more heavy maintenance acid
We had been told _that enemy tankss might .be . .tank: carriers-- .at ,.EF Ha fey;: we__- . .. , had o'
between us-and the-objective ..We_reached the
saved four tanks :
objective .::;iwincthidoeunt-t turned >; east, .- and:' ,
advanced -towards "Gabes about 13 . miles. I At a_ Pass -near Hafey we' left' two- \F:3
stopped to get the situation. The company tanks and one \(4 tank disabled . The next
commander assembled the platoon leaders and
told us we would advance eastward until
stopped. While we were stopped, some of my
men brought up eight German prisoners . They
said the Germans had left them. Along about
1730 three of my tanks dropped out-engine
and clutch trouble . I went on with the two I
had left. We went about 10 miles . It was too East of El Guettar we were told there
dark to see . We ran into-well, I don't know were enemy vehicles between us and the obwhat,
but everybody was shooting at every- jective . I saw some vehicles and opened up
body. I could hear on my radio, but could not at 5000 yards, to see what would happen .
talk. I sat there for about an hour . There was Then on the radio the reconnaissance officer
one tank I could communicate with ; I got his yelled to quit firing at him . We had never
position in relation to a wadi we had crossed been told the reconnaissance was there, and
before dark. He said he was near an old
we couldn't identify our own vehicles .
49
monument. I remetnhered where that was and
went back with my two tanks. When we got
there there were about fifteen or twenty tanks .
We- formed a circle for defense and awaited
orders. We waited all night. Next morning,
MAJOR BLODGETT sent a peep around to
tell us where the maintenance was and where
to find our organizations . We got all our vehicles
running and returned to El Hafey . During
the night maintenance had repaired my
three fall-outs .
The night before this attack started, our
i\13 tank threw a track . Sergeant McVey and
I put it back with the tools we had on the
tank. The captain complimented us because,
if the tank had been left, Jerry would have
shelled-it when daylight came .
When full maintenance is not available,
look . out for certain things : battery, water,
keep check on -control boxes in turret .. Many
of our bad. -clutclies are due to dust. 'If main-
-teilance uses . an air hose ' to blow this -out
morning we went back to destroy them with
our 75-mm guns. We fired five high explosive
and four armor piercing shells at the \14
tank, and finally set it on fire . One \13 tank
caught fire on the second shot . British reconnaissance
said that the \14 tank had never
been penetrated, only gouged .
T4 N/ Z' 'lie 5
The tank commander should have a combined
steel helmet and radio earphones . He
has to have his head out most of the time.
0
0
0
0
STAFF SERGEANT LEWIS SHELTON, ompany
"I", 13th Armored Regiment .
We didn't have enough training by platoon
and company back at Knox .
Our people don't understand terrain . They
think they are hidden, and then find themselves
in direct fire.
At Sened we saw gun flashes in two different
olive groves 1000 yards apart . We systematically
fired through each grove with high
explosive shells, 25 yards apart, advancing all
the time, still not seeing any guns or men . The
first we saw of them was men leaving a pill
box and going to a half-track . This was the
first we had seen of the half-track . The second
shot got them . We never saw the guns until
we were within 500 yards. There were trucks
too, hut we didn't see them either., until we
were ,within 100-yaids . They -were full of. Onmunition.
.:We -didn't throw . grenades- into the
foxholes, 'but' fired -on 'them.
Ours tanks' .'.-swepearrateed'-•from= the company.
We got back' to the assembly point by
following our own tracks.
Often we never know where the front line
is, and consequently hold our fire thinking
they are our own troops . I think if our boys
knew where our troops were, they would be
mentally set to go to work, and would at least
have a half-assed idea of where to look for
the enemy. At Sened we thought we were the
furthest forward element. I put up machine
gun nests to protect the tank. About that
time some 6th Infantry came up. That was
the first we had heard of them being there.
There are two things we ought to do
more-(1) fire with stabilizer while moving,
(2) keep zig-zagging in open country .
/N ~UN/S /A
50
One evening at Kasserine they took our
platoon over to the British on the Falla side
of the Pass. We were told the British had sixteen
hurchill tanks. These turned out to be
Valentines and every one of them was
knocked out. All the next day we were under
artillery fire and went into the wadi . At dark
Jerry sent one tank, as far as we could see,
down the road . We could have circled through
the low ground and hit them from the flank .
Instead we retreated and were put into position
on the forward slope of the hill . We were
told that there would be one peep down the
road_ and everything after that would be our
meat. Instead, 40 vehicles came down the road
and nobody expected any of -them. We were
on the skyline . Without a word of warning,
Jerry opened up on us and set 'three of us on
fire. I got away . Had we been in a low, open,
dark position, we could have knocked out
eleven of them . As it was, we were in a white
sand patch. We didn't know the disposition
of the troops who were working-with us . .
0
a
tr
: p -
1ST LIEUTENANT • GEORGE .DEMPSEY, . om:
-pany:_"I", 13th-Armored Regiment, near"'Sidi'
bou'Zid,.18 April 1943. :
The battle flags we've been flying seem to
draw fire.
I hope the supply sections understand that
when a tank is knocked out, even if the crew
escapes, they invariably lose all their personal
equipment.
0
0
0
0
LIEUTENANT OLONEL LOUIS A. HAMMA K,
751st Tank Battalion (M), Fondouk, 13 April
1943.
I believe there should be a definite battle
formation; the infantry following the
second wave of tanks and preceding the last
wave. This is necessary so that the tanks may
be able to knock out any machine guns that
/WrERV/EW5 AT THE FRONT
are missed by the leading waves, and then
open fire behind the advancing infantry .
I have what is known as the regular formation,
in which I have one company to support
the other two companies going on the
objective. The supporting company fires
either direct or indirect . One company goes
to the right, and one company to the left . The
right company, using fire and movement by
platoons, covers the whole objective, while
the left company gives close, direct support
by fire . The left company then crosses the objective
in the opposite direction and takes position
to support the other two companies on
the next objective. In the meantime, as soon
as the support company's fire is masked, it
proceeds on the right to the second objective.
When the final or main objective is taken, we
rally well forward, and if no further instructions
are given, we return to the . reservicing
position.
The formations- : right and left are-the'
same in -principle except when the terrain is
such that two companies can initially- go to
the right or. -left. .As: soon- as we coth under-'
fire, 'the companies : always 'advance .-by- pla:
toons, using fire and movement .
The terrain was flat, the objective was
high, and the enemy had direct observation
on us during the entire advance . It was a distance
of about 3,12' miles .
It was impossible for the tanks to go on
top of the objective. We surrounded the objective
and got as far as we could, the idea
being to support the infantry in their steep
climb . It was some two hundred feet high, and
it was rocky.
Once we attacked parallel to some very
high hills to clear out some enemy emplacements.
We ran into machine guns, received
antitank and artillery fire, and were divebombed
.
51
The dive-bomber hit one disabled tank,
and we lost another tank that got stuck in a
wadi. It was covered by artillery and machine
gun fire, and was set afire by the enemy . In
all, two tanks lost and one man wounded .
What damage was done, and what amount of
tanks did you lose due to mines, artillery, etc.
in the last attacks?
In the first attack we lost seven ; four by
mines and three by antitank guns. In the
second and third attacks we lost fourteen ;
three of those by antitank guns, and the
others by artillery and mines and mechanical
failures (two tanks ran together) .*
Do you know if the Diesel would be a handicap
in any way?
No but they should be in line .
How were your replacements?
The replacements so far have been very
good. They came from the 2nd Armored
Division.
On the march, what about antiaircraft defense?
We.-have been vo.ferrtuyn,ta t,e o -have a ..
'battery' .of antia-ircraft attached to us, and .
they have shot down three ',or f.our"-pla'nes
They have the 40-mm and also the .50 caliber
gun. The .50 caliber gun is a good antiaircraft
weapon .
You keep plenty of distance between your vehicles?
Yes.
What is that distance?
Seventy-five yards on the march. One
hundred yards in bivouac.
Did your riflemen fire at planes?
Everything was fired-pistols, rifles, machine
guns, and everything else .
°NOTE : The objective was finally reached by
the infantry, taking 133 Germans and no Italians .
7 N K E R 5 / N 7!/ N/ 5 / 4
On the recognition of planes we have a
perfect system . With the antiaircraft we have
a telephone set up to their command post .
They always identify the planes and before
we fire the flag from my command half-track
is raised.
You have people who can identify these
planes?
This antiaircraft unit is perfect in this
respect. They have a sergeant who has not
made a mistake yet. They do argue if it is a
Messerschmitt 109E or a Spitfire .
0
0
a
0
1ST LIEUTENANT THOMAS B . RUTLEDGE,
751st Tank Battalion (M), Fondouk, 12 April
1943.
One thing that I have learned : The next
time we move up, before we close up on the
objective, it is a good thing to look down on
the ground in front of the objective, and if
you see anything that looks like the enemy or
enemy guns, fire away at it with canister .
We were so close that with keen observation,
even two or three rounds or some machine
gun fire would have downed many machine
guns. I believe this would save us a lot of grief
afterwards . We know there are lots of mines,
but when approaching the objective we seem
to forget those machine guns . So, instead of
covering the ground in front of the objective
with machine gun fire, we thought only of the
objective, which was on the hill.
Did you see any of these antitank guns?
Not a great deal; only after I got behind
them.
How close were you then?
It could not have been more than thirty
yards .
Did you hit it?
Yes, with the 75-mm gun . We had to get
one out in a hurry, as I figured he may do
some more, damage. It may have been useless
expenditure of ammunition, but we had been
expending it before. At a time like this we
were always taught to shoot to kill, and it
being the first German I had seen, I thought
to dispose of him was the main thing, and we
did. We wanted to- get the gun out of action.
I saw it before I left, and it was burning,
which satisfied me .
Did you go back to the gun the next day?
Yes, it was out of action .
The camouflaged German antitank gun put out of action by Lieutenant Rutledge
52
INTERVIEWS AT THE FR_
Were you looking out the turret?
Yes.
You did not button up?
No sir, not yet. The driver was buttoned
up, but three shots hit the top of the cupola.
The enemy is known to try to pick off the
tank commander when he is sticking out . You
have to have good vision all around, but as
soon as I stuck my head out, I was fired on,
but I do not know where it was coming from .
We saw a dug-out near the members of the
enemy antiaircraft crew, and we decided the
fire was from there .
Then what happened?
We put a 37-mm high explosive shell in
front of the dug-out, the next round went
through that hole, and it exploded . They had
nice dug-outs, about five or six feet deep . I
saw the position of an antitank gun when I
had one of my tanks hit by them the day
previous . I figured the gun was facing in the
opposite direction of that one. I had in mind
to go down there as I thought there may be
other guns in the same place, when a call
came through to go back to the rallying position.
I told the driver we would be going back .
I gave instructions that we might be fired on .
I told him to keep zig-zagging, which he did,
when the antitank guns, that I had in mind,
opened up. But it was not an antitank gun
which got us . We found out the next day that
we had hit a mine which was covered with
the antitank gun fire. It was the first time I
dealt with an antitank gun, or a mine, and it
was a bad guess . We rolled into a little roadway
and I asked the driver if we were out of
action. I knew the next minute that we were
and I gave the order to abandon to the right
because the gun was on the left.
As we opened the door, the machine gun
fire started. I went to the front of the tank to
see where it was coming from, and it was
coming from both sides . We flattened out
53
and started crawling. I stayed behind the rest
with a Tommy gun. The driver was leading .
One of those guns saw us and when one man
raised up it hit him in the tail, and another
man was hit in the back and another in the
shoulder. Immediately I ordered everyone to
freeze themselves flat to the ground. We
stayed there until dark.
What time was this?
It was about ten o'clock when
abandoned the tank .
What happened then?
Well, during the day I heard the machine
guns behind us . They kept firing continuously .
They never stopped. Then, there were two
more which started firing from approximately
the same position in our front. At dark we
started crawling again and it took about two
hours before we approached friendly troops .
I was afraid that they would start firing on us,
so I told one of my men to go within hearing
distance and holler, `Friendly patrol'. We
could hear them now and then when they
raised their voices . He did so, was recognized,
told°his story, came back to us, and we moved
up. The man that was hit in the back could
hobble OK. We carried him across our
shoulders . The man that was hit in the leg
could not walk, but he did crawl for those
two hours. When this man was hit he just
clenched his fist and said `I am hit', and I
knew he was hit .
After I got in with friendly troops, I inquired
as to how close the first aid station was
for the three men. I reported to the aid station
so that they would know exactly who they
were and from what unit they came . We
walked on further and I wanted to get to a
telephone. They told me to go to the British
command car, but the line was not open, so
I asked if we could sleep there . So we slept
along side his vehicle until six o'clock in the
morning.
0
0
0
0
we
,AN1 ER5 /N 7UN/S /4
PRIVATE JAMES PASEK, ompany "A", 751st
Tank Battalion (M), near Fondouk, 12 April
1943 .
I was the radio operator in tank number
three . We started out from `A' ompany and
everything was going fine . I was sitting on one
of the ammunition boxes and was watching
tank number two through a vision sight . We
were swerving to the right and left. They
started shooting . Someone then calls out,
`They've hit the tank commander of tank number
two'. We kept going when suddenly our
tank commander yells out, "We are in a mine
field". They all thought it was an 88-mm gun
that was shooting off . I picked up a rifle and
went with the others until we saw our boys
near the mine fields. You could hear the armor
piercing shells, and you knew they were that
because when they hit they did not explode .
The rest of the crew went back -to a shallow
ditch. We thought it was best to stay with the
tank until we could not do any good.
Tank number one was coming to the left ; I
ran out twenty feet or so to try to flag it down,
and I was successful. We had tried to flag
down another tank previous to that, but the
tank commander probably did not see us, and
they hit the mine field too .
They kept firing the armor piercing shells
and when one hit a mine field near me there
was a terrific explosion, that's when I was
really scared . A tank came along and I said
I would lead them out of the mines and I led
them up to the road about a mile away. It was
my idea for them to come out on the same
tracks we had come in on . After this I went
back to the boys, for I could not leave my
crew, who were watching for the infantry and
guarding the tank. I really feel proud of our
crew-the best there is . My only regret is that
I could not get up to that hill. -
How are the radios?
Fine; I cannot complain. It's only an interphone
; actually, I am a radio tender.
54
ORPORAL STEPHEN J . SIRA USA, ompany
"B", 751st Tank Battalion (M), near Fondouk,
12 April 1943 .
Are you a tank driver?
Yes, sir, I am a tank driver .
Tell me how you drive the tank so that other
men may get to learn something of it .
From the start you have to keep up your
motor at all times to 1500 revolutions, and
never let it get lower than that, because when
she gets below 1500, the tank is no good as it
has no pick-up .
How do you know where to go?
The tank commander directs me.
Do you pick the ground?
Yes, I pick the ground .
Do you try to keep your front towards the
enemy?
Well, we kept it towards the hills as much
as we could.
Have you ever picked up any targets?
I did not until we were behind it.
What did you do then?
I stopped . You always stop when they fire.
What about stabilizers?
The stabilizers do not work on rough
ground. Our stabilizer was in maintenance,
and they did not fix it in time .
Did you worry about it?
No, sir.
What did you do when they started firing at
you when you left the tank?
We were lying as still as we could . Every
time we moved, they would open up .
Did you lie flat?
Yes.
What do you do yourself in the way of
maintenance when you can't get help?
We drain the carburetor, grease the throwout
bearings and support rollers . We have
INTERVIEWS AT THE FRONT
steel tracks . The cactus juice and sand gum
up the support rollers . We've burned out
three of these steel tracks .
•
0 4 0
PRIVATE RAYMOND HRISTY, ompany " ",
751st Tank Battalion (M), near Fondouk ; 12
April 1943.
What do you do?
I am the tank driver of tank number one .
What happened to you?
When we started up the second time, we
went through an orchard, and when we got
on the south side of the orchard, we turned
right and drove on the right side of the Pass
a little way, and then into the Pass, then drove
50 or 75 yards and turned left . We went
straight into the Pass and turned right again
and across the road. We went around 50 feet
when they shot us in the left track with an
armor piercing shell . The lieutenant said to
me, `Let's try to get through with one track' .
We drove about 50 or 60 feet when another
shot hit us. I started to go out through my
escape door. The turret was turned so that the
gun blocked the way . When I called to the
other boys to revolve the turret so I could get
out, I found they were all dead . I went over
and got out through the assistant driver's door,
and ran back until OLONEL HAMMA K
picked me up .
Was he in his M4 tank?
Yes, I stopped him . Other tanks wanted
to pick me up but I motioned them to go on .
Did he take you right into the tank?
No, but I rode on it .
Was he inside the turret?
He was inside and I was on it and it kept
moving. The turret cover was open .
Well, what trick would you tell other drivers
about driving?
Keep moving and not in one direction ;
keep zig-zagging . I would say, when firing,
55
always stop even to shoot just one shot . Pick
out a good firing position .
Do you try to get a position that covers the
tank?
Yes, always.
•
O O O
LIEUTENANT OLONEL McPHEETERS, oinmanding
91st Field Artillery Battalion, Armored,
1st Armored Division, near Lessouda,
17 April 1943.
At Sened, when these enemy tanks broke
through a sort of hysteria took hold of everyone.
The tanks were knocked out but the
hysteria continued. I had to halt one column.
We got the retreat stopped.
In a definite prepared tank attack, the artillery
should be as far forward as possible to
give maximum support. As the attack progresses,
keep displacing forward, one battery moving,
two firing.
Keep the men in the MTs . They are better
than any slit trench . Most of our' casualties
were from running during a shelling or a
bombing. Hit the dirt even if there is no hole .
The forward observers should be where
they can best see . Often it is with the infantry,
but sometimes from a point of vantage some
distance from the supporting unit . However,
wherever he is, he must make his presence
and whereabouts known to the supported
unit's commander.
We do not have enough forward observers
to have one every 500 yards along the front.
They have to place themselves carefully.
When the drive through Maknassy bogged
down, Division Artillery took over control of
five battalions . Observation was difficult and
the enemy was dug in .
In an attack by one of our infantry battalions,
we had two observers with the battalion.
We have one for the normal defensive
position. The infantry designated targets
simply by showing them to the observer .
r4 N/ ER5 /N TUN/5 /A
We have fired, sensed by the tankers and
infantrymen . They give the coordinates . We
fire one round of smoke for them to pick up;
when they get near enough we fire for effect .
In this division we are lucky to have a number
of officers, commanding tanks and infantry,
who know artillery, i.e. -LIEUTENANT
OLONEL HIGHTOWER, Field Artillery,
First Armored Regiment; ROSBY and
BLODGETT have learned to adjust fire .
We try to get the infantry to understand
the use of defensive concentrations for use
day or. night. The big difficulty is that they
don't know what these concentrations are for,
and that they can be used to great advantage .
I arrange to have my forward observers
adjust by daylight on certain vulnerable sectors.
The concentration numbers are given to
the -infantry commander to be fired on call
day or night. The new officers don't seem to
understand the value of such support. For
instance, oh the sector north of Maknassy the
infantry outpost commander was changed.
The old commander failed to give the new any
information of the prepared artillery fire in
his sector.
The forward observers must report to the
commander of the supported unit . Failure to
do this has, on several occasions, made our
artillery support ineffective . I jumped on the
otlgervers hard about it .
My objective would be to train every tank
crew for indirect fire .
This division has made four trips up the
Maknassy Valley. The enemy, with his good
observation posts, can defend with very few
troops. We got the high ground south of Maknassy
only because someone had the initiative
to do it on his own hook.
We .must learn to make better use of high
observation posts . I was able to do good work
on the Gum Tree Road because I was the
only one who had high observation posts . I
56
kept the observation post ahead of the advance
all the way up the valley .
I think too many of our troops are scared
of being shot at. There is a time to be cautious,
but the reconnaissance must draw fire, it is
their job.
I got so Goddam mad at this 155-mm gun
battery next to my command post. Because
the German 170-mm guns had fired on his
battery, he wanted to move back out of range .
His mission was to knock out those 170's .
When he asked permission to move, GENERAL
WARD said yes, he could displace forward
anywhere he wanted. We moved him up
another 2000 yards and silenced the 170-mm
guns. However, with those big guns, because
of the muzzle blast, you have to use discretion
about ceasing firing when you get counter
battery.
This Nebelwerfer 41 (German multi-barrel
mortar) made me so damn mad . It scares
the devil out of the front line troops (20
rounds in 10 seconds) . I took our Piper ub
and went to 6000 feet, found him, and got in
some rounds for effect . He shut up.
e
o
0
0
A BRITISH GENERAL OFFI ER OF THE WIDEST
TANK EXPERIEN E, Tunisia, 16 April 1943 .
In my opinion the Sherman is the finest
tank in the world, better than anything else
we have and also better than anything the
Germans have. It will be the best tank for
the next five years. The German Mark VI is
definitely no good. It will go only 1000 miles
on its own power; hence it must be hauled
everywhere it goes; and it can't be hauled by
rail because of its width. It can't be carried
anywhere in Europe. The use for light tanks
in the future, now that we have the Sherman,
is for reconnaissance .
If peeps are sandbagged the legs and feet,
which are usually hit by mine explosions, can
be protected from mines .
AV TERV/EWS AT THE FONT
Tanks should be run only one mile faster
than their lowest economical speed in order
to save the clutch.
The British mark their tanks by regiments,
by painting in large black letters on the backs
of their Shermans the names of cities, etc .
Painting the name in letters just as big as possible
on the stern flat works well .
Self-sealing gasoline tanks for tanks are
nice, but they are not vital . It is the ammunition,
not the gasoline, that burns . German
tanks burn too if ammunition is hit . I think
that the German aims to hit our ammunition .
In one battalion 15 tanks were penetrated ; 11-
of them burned, 10 because of ammunition . In
these 15 tanks there were only 15 casualties . I
estimate that casualties in destroyed tanks
are between 1 and 2 per tank, but closer to 1 .
In another battle 15 tanks were penetrated ;
7 burned, all but 1 by ammunition fires .
We must get away from the idea that
tanks can work alone . Tanks can take terrain
but can't hold it. The tank is, in my opinion
an assault weapon-not an indirect firing
weapon. However, in a regiment of tanks in
attack, 1/3 of them should be used for neutralizing
fire .
It takes three months to train tactically a
tank unit.
A good drill is to have tanks shoot at each
other with small caliber weapons . Try to hit
the ammunition compartment . The only good
way to fire Shermans is covering each other
and firing from hull down positions . It is important
to continually work ammunition towards
the gun-take every opportunity to refill
ready clips and the ammunition rack in
turret.
As to buttoning up tanks in combat, the
commander should not be foolhardy but he
must look around . A tin hat is necessary when
the commander exposes his head .
57
To pick up a casualty, drive over the man,
pull up the escape plates, have the assistant
driver reach down with his feet and roll the
wounded man face down, and then pull him
in shoulders first.
A good drill in combat practice is to bang
the tank with a hammer and say the tank is
burning. I used this signal to rule out tanks
and train the crews to get out.
In battle the mention of `withdrawal' is
fatal.
The Germans' 50-mm antitank guns are
more damaging than the 88-mm, because they
are harder to find and so many more of them .
Smoke is indispensible when caught under
antitank fire ; and is especially useful when
working with infantry, to point out objectives
such as antitank guns ; to screen their movements;
and to cover them while clearing
mines. It is also useful for recovery of vehicles .
Keep on your own side of the smoke .
a
a
o
a
APTAIN HENRY . TIPTON, Parachute Infantry,
Aide to BRIGADIER GENERAL T . J .
AMP, Krerouf, 10 April 1943. Log of advance
by ombat ommand "A" of the 1st
Armored Division .
LIEUTENANT OLONEL HIGHTOWER
of the Staff of ombat ommand 'A' of
the 1st Armored Division gave the word `go'
for ombat ommand 'A' at 1235 . The ombat
ommand was marching from various
initial points to force Rebaou Pass south of
Faid Pass, sweep the valley east of the mountains
to the north with the objective of Krerouf,
and the further mission to make contact
with the 34th Division near Fondouk .
BRIGADIER GENERAL McQUILLAN,
in command, moved in his tank followed
by his scout car, and directed the attack
by radio . He left ombat ommand 'A'
bivouac west of Sidi hou Zid at 1310 .
T N/ E/ 5
GENERAL AMP followed in his jeep .
LIEUTENANT T. E. HILLIARD and I took
turns driving . him because the driver was
killed last week when the jeep got bombed
and shot up . We helped each other keep in
the track of GENERAL McQUILLAN'S
tank and scout car so as to avoid mines. We
had sand bags on the floor of the jeep. The
attack went well and GENERAL McQUILLAN
quickly forged to the front of the
column, checking the readiness of the units to
fall in as he passed . The start was timed so as
to go through the mine field as soon as it was
cleared by the engineers.
We met an artillery outfit at 1425 halted
at the side of the road ; they said they were
waiting for the advance guard. GENERAL
McQUILLAN pushed them ahead and he outdistanced
us. Near the Pass of Rehaou at the
/ N ~!/ N / 5 / 4
mine field the column was halted . GENERAL
AMP walked ahead and found reconnaissance
elements halted ; they said they thought
the road was blocked . At this same time
OLONEL SUTHERLAND, of GENERAL
McQUILLAN'S staff was ordering the same
elements to resume its march . These people,
sitting in the road doing nothing, was an example
of what one vehicle can do to a column
of troops . It was holding up the entire ombat
ommand and the road was absolutely
clear in front. The trouble was that three or
four empty peeps of the mine-sweeping detachment
had parked on the shoulders of the
road. You could get between them, but it
sort of looked like the road was blocked .
We went through the Pass at 1525, had
covered 18 miles in two hours and fifteen
minutes. I saw one vehicle disabled by an
ontact near Fondouk, 10 April 194 •.4, between a peep of
the 34th Infantry Division and a scout car of ombat
ommand "A" of the 1st Armored Division
58
antitank mine. We caught up to GENERAL
McQUILLAN and reached the road west
from Faid at 1615. This was 25 miles from the
start. GENERAL McQUILLAN called up
his reconnaissance and directed full speed advance
on the objective. His reconnaissance
still lagged and he goaded them on by taking
the lead himself, but soon outdistanced them
and reached his objective, Krerouf, at 1730,
39R miles from the start . This speed was
based, in part, on the fact that Arabs were
grazing their camels along the road. We knew
that the camels were valuable and that the
Arabs probably wouldn't put them where
there was going to be any shooting . We took
it easy and put our guns to safe when there
were camels close by.
On the main road on the way up there was
a fork in the road, and we asked a friendly
native who was standing there where the Germans
were. With a shout of laughter he said,
`The Germans! Whoosh!' and he accompanied
his `Whoosh' with a wave of his arms up the
road over the mountains to the northeast, indicating
that the Germans had gone in a
hurry.
Krerouf was where two unimproved roads
crossed each other ; it was marked by a road
sign. GENERAL McQUILLAN radioed
that he had reached his objective and changed
to his scout car from his tank and GENERAL
AMP went into the scout car with him. He
started on to contact the 34th Division near
Fondouk. HILLIARD and I followed in the
jeep, as the get-away men of the patrol . The
tank slowed down a little and wouldn't push
fast enough, so GENERAL McQUILLAN
INTERVIEWS AT THE rRONT
59
ran his scout car ahead of it and led the way
for a while . After that he let the tank take
the lead again and the sergeant really made
that tank run . We contacted the outpost of the
34th Division 17 miles further north, near Fondouk,
at 1830. We had then made 56% miles
from the start . The outpost was surprised
when the tank bore down on them. GENERAL
McQUILLAN radioed back the contact.
The outpost was living high on German
supplies.
On the way we had passed all kinds of
abandoned German equipment and often had
to run around grenades and other stuff in the
road. We went back to Krerouf and on the
way there came a request over the radio for
confirmation of reaching' Krerouf. Apparently
no one believed we could have gotten there so
quickly. We stopped for an Italian motorcycle
that was in perfect condition except for three
broken spokes . An engineer colonel was with
us and he had us tie a tow rope on it and jerk
it around a little to be sure there were no
booby traps. We loaded the motorcycle in the
jeep and when we got back to camp GENERAL
McQUILLAN'S aide started running
around on it.
A few loads of Germans who had been cut
off by our advance were being collected, and
in the blackout a truck loaded with prisoners
ran into and completely wrecked our peep
that was carrying our baggage up with the
rear echelon of the ommand Post. The driver
wasn't hurt.
This tactical advance was conspicuous for
its lightning speed and determination .
0
0
o
e
T NN ER5 /N TUN/5 /r4
60
General amp, some of the Africa orps prisoners
and General McQuillan - Krerouf, 11 April 1943
INDEX
Aerial Photographs 25, 35, 43
Alertness 8 (Note), 17, 39, 40
Ammunition
Armor Piercing 22, 27, 31, 38, 39, anister 44, 45, 49 41, 44, 52
hecking 24, 27, 57
High Explosive 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 31, 32, 35, 36, 43, 49, 50,-56
Smoke 21, 23, 26,-32, 56,57 Supply 27, 39, 43, 44
Tracers 18, 25 Antiaircraft 15, 16, 17, 20, 25, 28, 43, 45, 48, 49, 51
Antitank Guns
amouflage 19, 20, 22
Employment 19, 20, 22, 35, 37 Enemy 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 27, 33, 49, 51, 52, 53, 57
Overrunning 35, 37
Artillery
Enemy 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 32, 35, 43, 51
Observer 21, 33, 37, 47, 48, 55, 56
Support 16, 21, 23, 25, 31, 33, 36, 37, 38, 40, 46, 48, 55, 56 Assault Guns 21, 43 Battle Driving 13, 19, 22, 27, 28, .29 31, 37, 39, 42, 45, 54 Battle Training = 30, 41, 44, 48 Booby Traps, see also Mines 15, 16, 19, 43, 58 Bombs 15, 17 amouflage, see also over, oncealment 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 32, 34,' 36, 42
lothing, care and use 30, 33, 34, 50 ommand Posts 30, 45
ommunications 14, 28, 30, 35, 36, 37, 40, 43, 45, 49, 54, 58
ompass 43, 45 oncealment, see also over, amouflage 17, 28, 44 ooks and Bakers 15, 16
ountersigns 18, 47, 53 over, see also oncealment, amouflage 14, 18, 17, 18, - 28, 44 Discipline 1, 2, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 47 Dispersion 19, 43, 48
First Aid 20, 30, 37, 45 Flares 17,18, 21, 23, 25, 33, 41, 43
Foxholes, see also Slit Trenches 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 41, 42, 49, 50
Grenades, see also Rifle Grenade 13, 15, 16, 17, 46, 50, 59
Gunnery
Machine Gun
Enemy 15, 16, 17, 19, 24, 27, 42, 46, 51, 53
Technique of fire 18, 19, 21, 28, 41, 43, 44, 48, 52
Sighting 24 Technique of fire 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30, 32, 35, 36, 38, 39, 50
20-mm 23 37-mm 21, 41, 44, 45, 53 40-mm 51 47-mm 37, 40 50-mm 23, 57 75-mm 22, 23, 38, 45, 49, 52 77-mm 26, 36 88-mm 13, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 49, 54, 57
105-mm 23, 40 155-mm 32, 56 170-mrn 56 Half-Tracks 15, 17, 21, 22, 30 (Note), 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 50, 52
Harrassing Tactics 17, 18, 40, 46, 47 Helmets 11, 30, 50, 57
Individual Initiative 2, 13, 25, 28, 38, 54 Interior Guard Duty 47 Interphone 28, 38, 54
61
59
44
43
33
24
57
59
54
56
45
56
46
59
45
59
47
54
30
58
51
17
23
44 -
56
55
46
54'
Straggler's Post 42
51
21
48
57
49
56
43
43
45
56 -
50
57
53
48
55
56
57
38
57
54
45
50
50
Water Discipline 1
SE OND EDITION
Hq-R-851-H-Ft. Knox-10-3-43-6500
62
Leadership
2, 3, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 32, 35, 36, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 48, 47, 54, 57,
Living onditions 11, 13,
Maps 23, 35,
March Discipline 13, 14,
Marksmanship, enemy 14, 15, 16, 18, 22,
Medical Service 16, 33, 37, 45,
Mines 14, 15, 19, 32, 35, 36, 37, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58,
Morale 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 35, 39, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48,
Mortars -------------------------------------------------------- 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 34, 40, 44,
Night Fighting 13, 16, 17, 18, 22, 25, 27, 41, 43,
Observation Posts 17, 36, 37, 43, 47, 55,
Organization of Unit 42, 45,
Outposts 13, 45,
Patrolling 8 (Note), 13, 16, 18, 42, 44,
Peeps 33, 40, 41, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 56, 58,
Physical Training 2, 10 (Note) 24, 30, 41, 43,
Radio 21, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50,
Rations 13, 14,
Reconnaissance 3, 19, 22, 23, 24 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 42, 47, 48, 49, 56,
Re lacements 1, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 42, 43, 44,
R es 13, 14, 15, 16,
Rifle Grenade 21,
Scouting, see also Patrolling 13, 15, 16,
Self Preservation 1, 6, 13, 14, 16, 17 18, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 42, 43, 47, 53, 55,
Slit Trenches, see Fox Holes 20, 31, 32, 42, 47,
Snipers 15, 17, 18, 42,
Stabilizers 27, 38, 50,
Stukas
Tactics
Tanks
----------------------------------------------------------------
Armored Infantry
Enemy 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31,
Tanks
4, 5, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38,
32,
39,
33,
40,
34,
46,
21,
35,
48,
23,
14,
36,
49,
25,
15,
37,
50,
37,
16,
38,
51,
28,
39,
40,
17,
40,
52,
29,
49,
48,
18,
44,
54,
34,
55,
36,
23,
43,
39,
M-3
M-4 28, 29, 30, 33, 35,
Mark II
Mark III = 22,
36,
28,
Mark IV 21, 22, 23, 27,
Mark VI
33,
22,
34,
24,
Battle Flags
Buttoning Up 25, 28, 29, 36, 53,
ommanders 21, 25, 27, 28, 35,
Destroyers 21, 24, 31, 35, 36,
Dismounting 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 38, 39, 53,
Driving 19, 22, 27, 28, 29, 31, 37, 39, 40, 42, 54, 55,
General 28, 29, 32, 33, 49, 54, 56,
Gunnery 5, 21, 22, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30,
Identification 21, 22, 23, 25, 35, 38, 45, 47, 49,
Maintenance 2, 6, 29, 30, 33, 35, 39, 44, 45, 48, 49,
Recovery 24, 33, 35,
Terrain
Tactics, see Tactics
-------------------------------------------------------- 19, 28, 29, 30, 37, 39, 42, 44,
Training 1, 9, 13, 14, 15, 25, 27, 29, 30, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 48,
16
German Tactical Doctrine, 1942
MILITARY INTELLIGEN E SERVI E
WAR DEPARTMENT
WASHINGTON, December 20, 1942
NOTI E
INF Div
Div Hq 8
Rcn Tr 2
Sig o 2
Engr Bn 7
Med Bn 7
QM o 7
Hq Inf Regt, 6 each_ 18
Inf Bn, 7 each--_ 63
Hq Div Arty-_ .- 8
FA Bn, 7 each--_
28
150
1 . The publications of Special Series are for the purpose of providing officers
with reasonably confirmed information from official and other rciiable
sources .
2 . Nondlvisional units are being supplied with copies on a basis similar
the approved distribution for divisional commands, as follows :
Av Div
Div Hq ..--_
Ord o
Sig Tr
RcnSq
Engr Sq
Med S(I .
QM Sq
Hq av Brig, 3 each_
av Regt, 20 each-
Hq Div Arty-
FA Bn, 7 each----
150
SPE IAL SERIES
No. 8
VIII) 461
to
AsMo Div
Div Hq-__
11
Rcn Bn-_--
7
Engr Bn 7
Med Bn_ . .
7
paint 13n____
7
Sup Bn_
7
Div Tn Hq
8
Arind Regt, 25 each- 50
FA Bn, 7 each_-_ - 21
Inf Regt__ _
25
150
Distribution to air units is being made by the A-2 of Acme Air Force' .
3 . Each command should circulate available copies among its oflicers .
Reproduction within the military service is permitted provided (1) the source
is stated, (2) the classification is not changed, and (3) the informal Oh is
safeguarded . Attention is invited to paragraph 10a, AR 3S0-5, which is
quoted in part as follows : "A document * * * will be classified and
* * T marked restricted when information contained therein is for official
use only, or when its disclosure should he * * denied the general
public ."
4 . Suggestions for future bulletins arc invited . Any correspondence relating
to Special Series may be addressed directly to the Dissemination Group,
Military Intelligence Service, War Department, Washington 1) . .
I
FOREWORD
FREDERI K THE GREAT, as the result of his experiences In
the Seven Years' War, is credited with establishing the
first General Staff in the, . history of military forces . This
Staff was created to handle administrative details, thus
releasing more time to the commanders for tactical considerations.
It was not, however, until 1810 that I rederick's
successors established a school to train officers for
General Staff duty . Because successful military results
were achieved, France, Great Britain, the United States,
Japan, and other countries based the formation of their
General Staffs upon the model set by Germany .
Beginning with Scharnhorst, such distinguished leaders
and strategists as Moltke (the elder) and von Schlieffen
were closely associated with the development of the
General Staff School, which operated continuously from
1810 until the outbreak of World War I . Subsequent to
that war the Versailles Treaty forbade the continuance of
the school, and it was not until 1933 that the Kriegsakademie,
as the Germans call it, was officially reopened in the
Berlin location that it was occupying at the outbreak of
World War II.
During the years from 1935 to 1939, the United States
was allowed to send four individual officers to take the
course . From their illuminating reports it is possible to
learn the trend of German methods and teachings up to
Hitler's attack on Poland . Our observers unanimously
agreed that the main body of doctrine taught at the
III
IV
FOREWORD
Kriegsakademie-the body of doctrine that underlies the
German warfare of today-is set forth in Truppenfuhrung,
the German tactical bible so very similar in matter and
precept .to our own FM 100-5, Field Service Regulations,
Operations .
The following partial resume of doctrine 1 taught at the
Kriegsakadein'i`e is actually a practical adaptation of relevant
parts of Truppenfuhrung . It will be noted that this
resume (ignoring the factor of translation) is written
almost exactly as a German would instruct Germans .
This faithfulness to the tone of the original lectures has
been made possible because of the extremely adequate
reports, which were made by the U. S . officer-students.
Throughout, striking similarities will be . observed
between German tactical doctrine and . that set down in
pertinent manuals of the U . S Army. U. S. officers,
however, should not be misled by the similarities to overlook
the differences that also exist . With regard to one
of the basic similarities in doctrine, it has been pointed
out by, one of our Kriegsakademie graduates that "Owing
to the phlegmatic nature of the German individual,
initiative and aggressive action have to be forced on the
lower leaders and staff, rank and file, whereas we possess
these characteristics as a natural heritage .
I The Military Intelligence Service has published the following bulletins
which describe various aspects of German military methods : "The German
Armored Division," Information Bulletin,, No . 18, June 15, 1942; "German
Methods of Warfare in the Libyan Desert," Information Bulletin, No. 20,
July 5, 1942 ; "The German Armored Army," Special Series, No. 4, October
17, 1942 ; "The Development of German Defensive Tactics in yrenaica-
1941," Special Series, No. 5, October 19, 1942 ; "Artillery in the Desert,"
Special Series, No. 6, November 25, 1942. Information about specific
organizations and weapons may be found in TM 30-450, Handbook on
German Military Forces .
TABLE OF ONTENTS
Page
Section I . POST OF THE OMMANDER
II. DUTIES OF THE STAFF
III. ESTIMATE OF THE TERRAIN
1
2
3
3445556
6
7
1 . ROADS AND RouTES
2 . RAILROADS
3 .
4,
5 .
6 .
TERRAIN FOR THE ATTA K
TERRAIN FOR THE DEFENSIVE A TION
a . General .
b . Questions To Be onsidered
TERRAIN FOR
TERRAIN FOR
THE DELAYING A TION
THE BIVOUA
IV. ON EALMENT
7. PROTE TION AGAINST GROUND RE ONNAISSAN E- 7
a . Hostile Observation 7
b . Offensive oncealment 7
8 .
c . Defensive oncealment
d . False Appearances
S
S
PROTE TION AGAINST AIR RE ONNAISSAN E 8
9 . ON EALMENT IN REST AREAS_--- . .. .-- . 9
10 . ON EALMENT OF TROOP MOVEMENTS 9
a . Loading and Unloading 9
b. Road Movements 9
11 . ON EALMENT IN BATTLE 10
V. OMBAT INTELLIGEN E 11
12 . THE PREPARATION OF INTELLIGEN E REPORTS- ..- 11
13 . WHAT To REPORT . 12
14 . ONTA T AND OORDINATION BETWEEN FRIENDLY
UNITS 12
15 . TRANSMISSION OF ORDERS AND REPORTS_-- 12
16 . ADVAN E MESSAGE ENTERS 13
17 . INFORMATION THROUGH SPE IAL MEANS 14
18 . IMPORTANT PRIN IPLES OF RE ONNAISSAN E---- 14
19 . STRATEGI RE ONNAISSAN E 15
20 . TA TI AL RE ONNAISSAN E 15
21 . RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALIONS 16
V
VI
Section V, OMBAT
TABLE OF ONTENTS
INTELLIGEN E- ontinued .
TARLE UF ON'I'E;STS VII
Page
U 14 Section XI . VARIOUS TYPES OF BATTLE 44
22, MOTORIZED RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALIONS I li
23 . RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALION OF THE INFANTRY XII . THE ATTA K 4 .5
DIVISION 18
47 . ['OHMS of ATTA K__ .._ - 4 .5
24. BATTLE RE ONNAISSAN E 18
48 . ONSIDERATIONS FOR AN ATTA K . . 46
VI, PRIN IPLES OF OMMUNI ATION .- . 20 49, ME HANI S Ill" AKTTA ._ . . .- 47
I 50. ATTA HING A POSITION 49
25. OPERATION OF SIGNAL OMMUNI ATION Taooi'S__ 20
51, ARTILLERY J"MPI,OYMEN'I' .50
26„ D.RDEn OF THE DIVISION OMMUNI ATION OF-
21
22
22
,92 . INFANTRY P~OSI'ION OF READINESS (BEREITSTEI,
51
52
FI ER
27 . OMMUNI ATION IN THE DEFENSE
28. VARIOUS MEANS OF OMMUNI ATION
LUNG) . . .. . . . . . .
. INFANTRY A TION UP TO THE FIRST ASSAULT' . .
54, ARTILLERY SUPPORT OF THE INFANTRY ADVAN E_ 53
VII. ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION 26 55 . INTERMITTENT ADVAN E OF THE RESERVES, __ 53
56 . BREAKTHROUGH 54
29. GUIDING PRIN IPLES 26 a . Penetration of the Hostile Position 54
30 . HANGING THE MISSION 28 b . Time of Attack 54
31 . SEIZING THE INITIATIVE , 28 c . Enemy WI'ithdrawal 54
VIII . THE DE ISION 29 57 . A TION RE OMMENDED FOR ERTAIN SI'4; 'IAL
ASES 55
IX. FIELD ORDERS 30 58 . MEETING ENGAGEMENT . 56
a . Speed and Surprise 56
32. GENERAL RULES
33. WARNING ORDERS (VORBEFEHLE)
30
31
b. Time and Space
c . oordination . . .--__
07
57
34 . OMPLETE OPERATIONS ORDERS (GESAM'PBEFEHLE)
35 . SEPARATE ORDERS (EINZELBEFEHLE)
32
33
d . Methods 58
59. PURSUIT 58
36 . SPE IAL INSTRU TIONS (BESONDERE ANORONUN- XIII. THE DEFENSE 61
GEN) 33
60 . FAVORABLE TERRAIN r'OR DEFENSE_ _ - - 61
X. MAR HES 34 61 . OTHER ONSIDE'RA'TIONS .. .._ 62
a . Defense, or Delaying Action? 62
37 .
38 .
39 .
MAR HING IN MULTIPLE OLUMNS
MAR HING IN SINGLE OLUMN
PROTE TION AGAINST AIR ATTA KS
34
35
35 62,
b . Preparation of Defense Area 62
62
63
. Maneuvers
GENERAL PRIN IPLES OF DEFENSE
40 . NIGHT MAR HES . 37 63 . ORGANIZATION F D EFFNSE AREAS 63
41 . DAY MAR HES 38 a . Defense in Depth 63
42. ORGANIZATION FOR MAR HING 39 b . over and Obstacles . 64
43 . ONNE TION AND OMMUNI ATION_ .
- . 41 64, RESERVES, RELIEFS, AND REAR POSITIONS_ - 64
44, RATES OF MAR H . 41 65 . A TUAL OPERATION OF THE DEFENSE . 65
45 . MAR H RESTS_ ___ 42 a. Main Line of Resistance 6 .5
46 . MAR H OUTPOSTS 43 b. Advance Position 66
. Outpost Position 66
VIII
TABLE OF ONTENTS
Section XIII . .THE DEFENSE- ontinued .
Section I . POST OF THE OMMANDER
The personal influence of the commander upon his
troops is of the greatest significance . He must be located
where he can most effectively lead . On the march he
should be as far forward as security permits, and his
location should be definitely known by the members of
his staff so that all reports may reach him promptly . In
the attack his command post should be located as far
forward as possible, yet protected from hostile fire so as to
insure undisturbed operation ; for tactical reasons, the post
is placed near the main effort, facilitating control at the
most important point of the battlefield . The movement
of the command post is influenced by the location of existing
wire lines, and the divisional signal officer is kept constantly
informed so that communication requirements may be
better anticipated . In a delaying action, the commander
remains in the forward position until he is convinced that
his order for withdrawal is being successfully carried out ;
then, with his artillery commander, he goes back to the
new position . In very difficult or dangerous situations,
often present while withdrawals are being executed, the
commander will remain with his troops,
i
40773,E°-42 2
66. ARTILLERY IN THE DEFENSE
Page
a 67 .. ontrol by Artillery ommander 67 1) . TTactics 67 c. Barrage 67 67. INFANTRY IN THE DEFENSE 68 68. HOSTILE PENETRATIONS 68 69. THE OUNTERATTA E_ . 68
.i,y,7P..,,WITHDRAWAL TO A REARWARD POSITION _ . 69
XIV. THE DELAYING A TION 70
XV, RETREAT-RETIREMENT 72
XVI. THE EMPLOYMENT OF FIELD ARTILLERY 73
71. ORGANIZATION . .__ 73 72. LO ATION IN THE ATTA x 75 73. LO ATION IN THE DEFENSE 75 74. OOPERATION WITH INFANTRY 75
APPENDIX. SAMPLE GERMAN ORDERS. 77
Figure 1, Artillery in
ILLUSTRATION
a division attack 74
Section II . DUTIES OF THE STAFF
The commander should not be troubled with details .
To insure frictionless performances, there are definite
assignments for-staff positions and duties . Each staff
maintains its prescribed strength. The tactical staff
remains with the command echelon, whereas the supply
and administration staff remains well to the rear, in the
vicinity of the trains .
2
Section III. ESTIMATE OF THE TERRAIN
Proper utilization of modern implements of war (artillery,
airplanes, gas, tanks, etc .) can only he accomplished
through their careful adaptation to the terrain . The
commander himself can obtain only a general picture of
the terrain ; he has, however, many supplementary means
by which he can learn the true condition of the area in
which his command is employed : for example, reconnaissance,
air photographs, maps, sketches, and questioning
of inhabitants . In judging terrain for specific purposes,
you 1 must bear in mind the plan of the commander and
the immediate task-to determine how that plan will be
influenced (aided or hindered) by the terrain .
1 . ROADS AND ROUTES
Use the best roads available as routes for supply trains :
gain protection against air observation, but avoid defiles
and narrow valleys . For combat trains, remember that
cover from ground observation is also required . How are
the roads constructed, and how will bad weather influence
them? What are the bad or impossible stretches, and
what is the possibility of avoiding or repairing them?
I The form of the material, here and at many other points, is governed by
the fact that it was presented as lectures at the Kriegsakadeinie .
3
4
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
What are the widths? 2 defiles and excavated passages?
bridges? I fords? 4 ferries? 6 steep grades? 6
2 . RAILROADS
Differentiate between standard gage (1 .435 meters, or
4 feet 8'2 inches) and narrow gage (1 .20 meters, or 3 feet
11'4 inches, to 0 .6 Deter, or 1 foot 11% inches) . Differentiate
also between field line, cable line, electric, and
steam . How many rails are there, and does room for
addition exist alongside the rails? After a small amount
of work on the bridges, tracks can usually be adapted
for use as marching routes for foot and mounted troops,
as well as for motor vehicles .
3 . TERRAIN FOR THE ATTA K
(a) Where will the enemy resist the attack? Where
are his advance outposts, main position, switch positions?
(b) How has he disposed his forces-infantry, artillery,
reserve? (c) Where is a position of readiness (Bereitstellung),
and how can the terrain be best utilized for advance
to it? Is there concealment from air observation?
Until what point will the attacking force be concealed
from hostile ground observation? (d) Where are covered
approaches for infantry toward the hostile position? Are
attack objectives so conspicuous and so located that concentrated
artillery fire may be directed upon them?
2 For motor vehicles at least 2 .5 meters, or 8 feet 4y inches, and for passing
at least 5 meters, or 16 feet 9 inches.
° onstruction material, capacity, destruction and repair possibilities .
4 urrent speeds, beds, depths (for infantry up to 1 meter, or 3 feet 3 .4
inches, for machine guns and heavy infantry weapons up to 0 .6 meter, or 1
foot 11 .6 inches, and for armored cars up to 0 .9 meter or 2 feet 11 .4 inches) .
° apacity and time required for crossing .
° Usually negotiable by motor vehicles if the ratio is not higher than 1 to 7,
ESTIMATE OF THE TERRAIN
5
Where are the best positions for artillery and observation
posts? Where is the terrain most favorable for tanks?
Where does the terrain favor the enemy's counterattack?
(e) And, lastly, what kind of attack is most favored by
the terrain-penetration, envelopment, or frontal attach?
4. TERRAIN FOR THE DEFENSIVE A TION
a . General
A defensive position is frequently selected through
examination of maps . Immediately thereafter, officers
are sent on terrain reconnaissance . General Staff, artillery,
and engineer officers reconnoiter for their respective
purposes or weapons ; later, a coordinated defense plan is
built up from their information .
b. Questions To Be onsidered
Such questions as the following arise :
(a) What should be the locations of the main line of
resistance, the flank support, the outpost line, and the
advance positions? (b) Where can artillery and heavy
infantry weapons, as well as their required observation
posts, be located to bring the enemy under fire at long
ranges? (c) How can the enemy be subjected to frontal
and flanking fire immediately in front of the main line of
resistance, and where can a counterblow be effectively
delivered? (d) What obstacles must be constructed to
canalize the attack of the enemy, including his tanks, and
to cause him to advance where heavily concentrated fire
can be delivered? (e) Where will the reserves be located
to obtain cover and also to facilitate counterattacks?
(f) Should it be necessary to limit the enemy's penetra6
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
tion, and how- can the defensive be established in a position
to the rear?
5 . TERRAIN FOR THE DELAYING A TION
Where is an effective first line of defense? Where are
lines of defense to the rear? Where is favorable ground
for an outpost lipe? Where are covered avenues of
withdrawal? Where is observation for supporting weapons?
Where are natural obstacles and terrain features
which can be converted into effective obstacles? Where
is terrain which permits long-range observation and firing?
6. TERRAIN FOR THE BIVOUA
Before the troops arrive, reconnoiter bivouac areas and
routes leading thereto . Avoid large assemblages of personnel
. The smaller the groups, the easier to conceal in
villages, wooded areas, or other suitable locations. Maintain
the tactical integrity of units in bivouac . If it is
necessary to bivouac by day in open terrain, increase the
distance and intervals to minimize the effect of hostile
bombing. For tactical purposes, bivouac requirements
include: Adequate room ; security and screening forces
which occupy commanding terrain and are sufficiently
strong to permit time and space for the main force to
maneuver according to the situation ; and routes connecting
the various groups and leading to potential defensive
areas. Bivouac requirements for troops demand dry
ground and land (preferably uncultivated) which is
lightly wooded, protected against wind, and convenient
to a supply of water, straw, and wood . The proximity
of villages is desirable .
Section IV. ON EALMENT
Troops must use every opportunity and means to deny
information to the enemy . Otherwise the essential element
in the attack, surprise, is lost . oncealment is
most effective when the enemy requires a long time to
discover that he has been deceived .
7. PROTE TION AGAINST GROUND RE ONNAISSAN
E
a . Hostile Observation
Hostile observers and staffs can see great distances
from high points (observation posts) with field glasses
and telescopes ; therefore, (a) when troop movements are
contemplated, study the map carefully to insure cover
against possible hostile observation ; (b) conceal movements,
positions, and installations by a screen of security
forces to the front and flanks .
b. Offensive oncealment
Security in all directions must be considered . oncealment
may be either offensive or defensive . If offensive,
cavalry and other highly mobile combat units are launched
against the hostile reconnaissance forces to drive then
back . This method is effective, but occasionally hostile
patrols are able to infiltrate or go around the attacking
force.
8 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
c. Defensive oncealment
Defensive concealment is particularly effective when
the terrain contributes natural obstacles such as a river,
a chain of lakes, a swamp, or some similar area . The
stronger the natural obstacles, the weaker the force employed
to protect the avenues of approach, and also the
stronger the force that can be held as mobile reserve .
Reconnaissance units are sent far forward, operating
energetically and according to opportunity against the
hostile reconnaissance force .
d. False Appearances
In situations where it is desired to deceive the enemy
and impart the impression of great strength, circulate
false rumors, execute false marches, and send troops
against hostile reconnaissance forces with instructions to
fire a great deal of ammunition rapidly, to tie up the
hostile communications net, to disturb radio transmission,
and to organize deceptive transmission on radio or
wire .
8 . PROTE TION AGAINST AIR RE ONNAISSAN E
Strong activity on the part of the hostile air force
requires careful consideration for the concealment of
troops and installations, particularly when antiaircraft
means are lacking or very limited . The fact that photographs
reveal every detail must not be overlooked . Artificial
means of concealment, such as camouflage, smoke,
or nets, are effective ; but it is more important to survey
carefully the surrounding . area . Avoid constructions and
artificial works, sharp color contrasts, and lights . Realize,
on the other hand, that measures for concealment
ON EALMENT 9
hinder the troops, render more difficult, freedom of movement
and distribution of orders, and through night
marches and detours cause loss of time and decrease the
capacity to fight .
9 . ON EALMENT IN REST AREAS
Select rest areas in wooded locations or in several
villages . Place horses, tanks, vehicles, etc., under trees
or in stalls or courts, but avoid regular parking or paradeground
distribution . Regulate traffic in the area, keeping
the main roads and intersections free .
10. ON EALMENT OF TROOP MOVEMENTS
a . Loading and Unloading
In rail movements it is practically impossible to conceal
loading and unloading areas from hostile air reconnaissance
. When possible, march the troops by night to a
village near the loading station, permit them to rest, and
then move them on in smaller groups to the village where
the loading station is located . Load rapidly and vacate
the vicinity promptly .
b . Road Movements
In road movements, the concealment given by darkness
is most effective . Arrange the departure of troops front
bivouac at the beginning of darkness, with arrival in the
new area before daybreak . When marching by day,
select routes leading through woods, villages, or other
partially covered areas . The shadows of trees along
the roads offer excellent means for concealing columns,
including vehicles . Bride construction cannot be concealed,
but equipment can be so disposed prior to the
497725 * --42-3
10 GERMAN, TA TI AL liocraIIN.n
actual construction that there is little or no tell-tale
indication of the preparations .
11 . ON EALMENT IN BATTLE
arry out development and deployment, or either,
under the concealment of darkness. If the situation
requires execution, by daylight, seek covered areas .
Utilize camouflage to conceal the positions of guns, of
headquarters, and of observation posts .
Section V. OMBAT INTELLIGEN E
The commander must continually, day and' night, conduct
reconnaissance and utilize intelligence iiic tns to
seek information clarifying the enemy situation . As soon
as possible, he will forward information and important
reports to the next higher commander, Once contact with
the enemy is gained, steps should be taken not to lose
contact. In higher commands, and sometimes with the
lower units, a special officer (intelligence officer) will be
detailed to handle all intelligence matters . Such an
officer works in coordination with all the commanders of
attached intelligence units and information services, and
keeps them constantly informed of the situation .
12. THE PREPARATION OF INTELLIGEN E REPORTS
Keep in mind the following rules governing the preparation
of reports : (a) Determine beforehand what reports
must be sent in code and also what means of signal
communications are to be used . (b) Differentiate bebetween
what one has personally seen and what another
has remarked or reported . (c) Avoid euphemistic phrases
and exaggerations . (d) State strength, time, and place
exactly. (e) Include information on the condition of the
terrain. (f) Send in pertinent information yourself,
never assuming that another unit has already sent it in .
(g) In eery urgent cases, send a report not only to the
next higher commander but also direct to the commander-
11
12
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
in-chief. (h) From time to time, submit a complete
assembly of reports ; frequently a sketch will suffice .
13 . WHAT TO REPORT
In battle, utilize pauses to send in reports on enemy
movements, your own situation, the ammunition supply,
the condition of the terrain, and your own impressions .
Make suggestions for the seizing of . favorable opportunities.
Reports giving, such information as exists
just before , darkness sets in are especially valuable .
After a battle, report immediately what enemy troops
oppose your force, what the enemy is doing, what the
.condition of your own troops is, where your troops are
located, and what the status of the ammunition supply is .
14 . ONTA T AND OORDINATION, BETWEEN
FRIENDLY UNITS
Liaison between neighboring units, and between higher
and next lower units, is accomplished through a mutual
exchange of reports and a prompt communication of
friendly intentions . Large units utilize liaison officers
for this purpose, each unit sending one of its officers to
the other and holding him responsible for the exchange of
information, Such officers keep their commanders informed
of the situation with reference to the enemy, all
developments of the situation, and the intentions of the
other commander. The duties of a liasion officer demand
tactical knowledge, intelligence, and tact .
15. TRANSMISSION OF ORDERS AND REPORTS
Several communication means should always be available
to a commander . Where technical communication
OMBAT 12NTELLIGEN E
means are uncertain or cannot be maintained, then
courier service I is established . Very important orders
or reports are generally sent by officer messengers in
motorcycles or cars . If delivery is uncertain, several
means of transmission are used, as well as different routes,
to insure the prompt arrival of the information at its
destination.
Every commander is required to know the routes of
communication and the messenger route . All units assist
in the uninterrupted transmission of reports and messages .
Higher commanders and commanders of reconnaissance
and security units are authorized to examine the messages
which they contact en route, noting on the message that
they have done so, the hour, and the date .
16. ADVAN E MESSAGE ENTERS
To expedite the receipt of information, advance message
centers are established, particularly in the area or sector
where communications will be numerous . Such message
centers should be easily located, protected from hostile
fire, and definitely connected with the rearward message
center . Under certain circumstances (for example, on the
front of a cavalry corps), advance message centers and
message assembly points may be established at considerable
distances from the main headquarters, in order to
simplify and expedite the transmission of information
between the reconnaissance units and the main headquarters
.
7 Runners, mounted men, bicyclists, or motorcyclists .
14
OFaRMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
17. INFORMATION THROUGH SPE IAL MEANS
The air intelligence service observes hostile air activity
and provides information relative to the air situation, and
from this one can obtain a fairly accurate conception of
the enemy's intentions . The signal communication intelligence
service observes all hostile communications
(radio, telephones' telegraph, etc .) through goniometric
intercept, listening posts, wire tapping, observers, and
other means . The routine interrogation of prisoners of
war yields miscellaneous information . aptured documents
may include orders, maps, messages, notebooks,
newspapers, photographs, and films . Scrutiny of the
hostile press and publications is maintained .
18. IMPORTANT PRIN IPLES OF RE ONNAISSAN E
Do not dissipate reconnaissance strength . Superiority
of means is very important for successful reconnaissance :
but superiority in mobility and clever employment tend
to offset numerical inferiority . It will frequently be
necessary to fight for information . Advanced hostile
security and reconnaissance forces must be penetrated
or thrown back to make contact possible with the hostile
main force . In this connection, it is often advisable to
occupy important points quickly with motorized forces .
When there is great inferiority to the enemy, fighting
should be avoided, and an endeavor should be made to
penetrate the enemy screen or go around it .
The commander who specifies what information is to
be obtained should coordinate all his subordinate reconnaissance
means . Efficient reconnaissance is not obtained
through employment of large numbers of recon-
OMBAT INTELLIGEN E
15
noitering units, but by the careful direction and instruction
of these units as to what the commander wishes to
know . Definite missions and their relative urgency must
be indicated, and the means of sending information to
the rear, including definitely regulated radio traffic,
must be insured .
19. STRATEGI RE ONNAISSAN E
Strategic, or operative, reconnaissance endeavors to
build up a general picture of the overall situation, thus
aiding the commander . in chief in making the decisions
which have important influence on the entire campaign .
Missions may include observation of hostile mobilizations,
assemblies, initial march directions, railroad movements,
boat movements, supply echelons, construction of
fortifications, air activities, locations, strengths, movements
of motorized and mechanized forces, and, particularly,
open flanks . Such missions are performed by
air reconnaissance units, motorized reconnaissance battalions,
and army cavalry units. The three must supplement
each other and be carefully coordinated to that end .
20. TA TI AL RE ONNAISSAN E
Tactical reconnaissance is concerned with the movements
of the enemy in closer proximity : his movements,
bivouac areas, organization, breadth and depth of disposition,
supply service, construction of defensive works, air
activity, and location of airfields and antiaircraft . Especially
important is timely report of the location of
motorized or mechanized forces .
For air reconnaissance, the commander utilizes the airplane
squadron which is placed at his disposal for such
J6
QEEMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
purpose by tllle air force . For ground reconnaissance, he
utilizes independent motorized reconnaissance battalions,
motorized reconnaissance battalions of the cavalry,
mounted reconnaissance' battalions of the cavalry, and
reconnaissance battalions of the infantry divisions .
21 . RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALIONS
Definite sectors are generally assigned to reconnaissance
battalions . Within the corps, boundaries between divisions
are designated, and on open flanks the boundary is
designated between the flank reconnaissance area of the
division 'and that of the corps . Reconnaissance units
avoid fighting , unless it is absolutely required by the
situation in the accomplishment of their missions . If a
reconnaissance unit be given a security mission, the unit
should be reinforced by others units : for example, by
machine gun, light artillery, antitank, and engineer troops .
If a reconnaissance battalion is directly in front of the
division and in contact with the enemy, it should be
ordered either : (a) to move off to a side and continue
reconnaissance in that area, or (b) to await relief from
troops coming up from the rear, or (c) to fall back upon
the troops in the rear . In the absence of any orders,
under the aforesaid circumstances the reconnaissance
battalion should fall back upon the troops in the rear .
On an open flank, reconnaissance battalions are echeloned
forward.
22. MOTORIZED RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALIONS
The important advantage is speed . Motorized reconnaissance
battalions can reconnoiter by day and march
on by night, and are restricted only by limitations of the
eOM15A'r 1N'TELL1OEN E 17
motor vehicles, terrain, weather, roads, fuel supply, and
signal communication . They maintain connection with
mounted reconnaissance units by radio . Advancing forward
by bounds-the nearer the enemy, the shorter the
bounds--they remain as long as possible on roads . In
hostile territory, different routes for the return are
selected, and important points along the road, or important
places, are secured . Rest during the night is
obtained by avoiding main roads and villages, and by
halting under available cover in isolated areas . ontact
with the enemy, however, must be maintained .
The width of a sector should not be over 50 kilometers
(31 miles) . The depth is limited by fuel supply . Motor
vehicles in modern reconnaissance units have a radius
of action of between 200 to 250 kilometers (125 to 155
miles) without replenishment .
Scouting groups will generally be organized and dispatched
by the commander of a battalion . Such groups
include armored scout cars, motorcycles, and radio
equipment. Along the more important roads and those
leading to the decisive areas or points, patrols should he
stronger, but too large a patrol increases the difficulty of
concealment from the enemy . Armored car patrols
within scouting groups will be, given written orders pertaining
to route, destination, and information desired
they advance by bounds, with distance and speed sometimes
prescribed ; generally, however, they precede the
division at about 1 hour (approximnately 40 kilometers, or
25 miles) . Motorcycles are used to fill in gaps amid intervals,
thereby thickening the reconnaissance net . The remainder
of the motorized reconnaissance battalion serves as
a reserve and as a receiving and assembly point for reports,
497 i 35°-42--4
18
GERMANT, TA TI AL DO TRINE
23 . RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALION OF THE INFANTRY
DIVISION
The reconnaissance battalion of the infantry division is
employed as a unit, even if the division is advancing over
a broad front in several columns . The advance is made
by bounds somewhat shorter than those of the motorized
reconnaissance 1attalion . Scout groups are sent out
under the direction of the battalion commander . The
battalion can reconnoiter an area approximately 10 kilometers
(6 miles) in width, and seldom is sent more than 30
or 40 kilometers (25 to 30 miles) forward . The strength
of the scout groups (sometimes up to that of a platoon
with light machine guns) is, however, determined by the
situation and the mission . Patrols sent out from the
scout groups remain on the roads as long as possible,
advancing by bounds from observation point to observation
point.
Reconnaissance battalions of interior divisions are
usually withdrawn to the rear after the battle actually
begins . If, however, the division is operating over a
broad front or in difficult terrain, the battalion may be
reinforced, and utilized to fill in a gap or to seize an important
terrain feature. ommunications must be carefully
provided . Extra signal equipment and personnel may be
attached in exceptional cases .
24. BATTLE RE ONNAISSAN E
The purpose of battle reconnaissance is to reconnoiter
the enemy's front, flanks, and rear to establish definitely
the location of his flanks, artillery, heavy infantry
weapons, and reserves . 'Such reconnaissance locates our
OUN EALi E\T
own front line and often provides close ; in security and
terrain reconnaissance .8 Security is necessary at all times,
but reconnaissance must not be neglected to accomplish
security. Battle reconnaissance is established usually at
the opening phases of the development or deployment,
The advance of the infantry in the attack reveals very
quickly the location of hostile infantry and artillery ; also,
fire from our artillery upon , hostile infantry will generally
result in the hostile artillery delivering counterfire and
thus revealing its location .
There are both air and ground means available for
performing battle reconnaissance . Some of the specific
means of battle reconnaissance are : (a) Infantry patrols,
sometimes reinforced with light machine guns, heavy
machine guns, light mortars, or antitank guns . (b) Engineer
patrols, particularly valuable in approaching a fortified
area, a defile, or a river . (c) Artillery patrols, conisting
usually of an officer and a few mounted men
assigned to reconnoiter routes of approach, observation
posts, and fire positions . (d) Observation battalion (artillery),
skilled in locating targets by sound and flash, and
in evaluating aerial photographs .° (e) aptive balloons,
supplementing the preceding means and permitting a
general view over the hostile front .
8 Our observation posts and other friendly personnel, who are reconnoitering
for our own artillery, heavy infantry weapon, and antitank positions, can gain
much helpful information from units of the reconnaissance battalion . Sometimes
they actually accompany the battalion to get early information about
the terrain, potential targets, and gun positions .
° It assists our own artillery in firing on concealed targets by transmitting
weather data . By accurate surveying principles, it establishes the location
net for the batteries . The net is not restricted to the division sector, but
sometimes extends 6 to 10 kilometers (as much as 6 miles) .
Section VI . PRIN IPLES OF OMMUNIATION
The higher unit is responsible for the establishment and
maintenance.,.Qf. communication with the next lower unit .
Wire connection with neighboring units is always established
to the unit on the right. This rule does not release
the commanders of responsibility, however, to maintain
contact with units to their left .
Of special importance is the connection between artillery
and infantry. If an artillery unit is attached to an infantry
unit, then the infantry is responsible for the connection;
if the artillery is supporting an infantry unit, but
not attached to it, then the artillery is responsible for the
connection . If, however, the artillery, through some
special circumstances, is unable to establish the connection,
then the infantry must undertake the responsibility .
onnection with heavy infantry weapons is the responsibility
of the infantry commander concerned .
25. OPERATION OF SIGNAL OMMUNI ATION
TROOPS
The commander issues orders for the employment of his
communication units ordinarily after receiving the recommendations
of the communication officer . It is most
essential that the commander punctually give the communication
officer a -complete picture of the situation,
including the commander's intentions . The communication
means of a command post are assembled in a message
20
PRIN IPLES OR OMMUNI ATION
21
center . The proper functioning of communication is
dependent upon its useful employment on the part of the
commander and upon the technical training of personnel .
26. ORDER OF THE DIVISION OMMUNI ATION
OFFI ER
The order of the division communication officer should
contain : (a) The enemy situation, our own troops, the
plan of the commander ; (b) the mission of the signal
battalion ; (c) specific orders for the signal communication
companies and supply train ; (d) when applicable, instructions
relative to secrecy, replacement, utilization of coinmercial
nets, and system maintenance .
In the advance march, the division communication
battalion builds and maintains an axis of signal communication,
(wire lines) along the route upon which the
division commander and his headquarters are advancing .
In friendly territory, the existing commercial net is utilized
to a maximum ; in enemy territory, heavy field cable
is generally installed overhead . When contact with the
enemy has been established by the division, wire corn- .
munication must be maintained at all costs with the corps
and must also be supplemented by radio and other means .
Establishment of lateral connections within the division
and between divisions is also very important in coordinating
the tactical effort.
Within the division, all command posts and observation
posts should be connected according to their relative
importance . The division signal battalion will establish
lines to the infantry regiments, artillery commander, and
the artillery units operating under the artillery commander,,
as well as lateral connection to adjoining di22
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
visions . When there is a deficiency of means, the establishment
of the aforementioned artillery connection has
priority . The division signal officer will coordinate the
establishment of the communication net and supervise its
construction by his own signal troops and the communication
troops_ of the various units . In a rapidly advancing
attack, in pursuit, or in wtihdrawals or retreat, he will
restrict the amount of installation .
27. OMMUNI ATION IN THE DEFENSE
In the defense a very extensive communication net is
established . Its construction is governed by the situation,
and by the time, materiel, and personnel available .
Several means of communication between all important
defensive installations are provided . Wire communication
is carried by buried cables . Special communication
nets (such as infantry, artillery, antiaircraft) are established
. Alarms for gas and air attacks are installed .
Technical means to intercept hostile messages are
intensified.
28 . VARIOUS MEANS OF OMMUNI ATION
When new troops are attached to a command, additional
communication requirements are introduced ; so reserve
communication personnel should always be held out .
The operation of communication troops must not be
interfered with in any manner by other units. The
various means of communication can be characterized
as follows:
.(a) Telephone .-Installation of the telephone requires
time and materiel. Wire lines are sensitive to such disturbances
as fire, wind, snow, frost, and storms . The
PRIN IPLES OF OAMTMIUONNI 23
enemy can easily listen in on conversations, particularly
over single-wire connections ; in the danger zone, therefore .
double lines and heavy insulated wires are used .
(b) Telegraph.-The telegraph is simple in operation
and installation, and very often cannot he easily intercepted.
The Morse code is utilized .
(c) Automobile, mounted, messenger, bicylist, motorcyclist,
runner,-In a war of movement, these means are often
the most reliable . They are used without hesitancy when
technical means are not available . Speeds of transmission
vary.11
(d) Radio .When wire connections fail or are not
functioning steadily, the radio is indispensable . Electric
storms, static, other radio transmission on similar wave
lengths, mountains, and other interferences minimize
effective range of hearing . In practice, radio is valuable
only if messages are short ; transmissions should therefore
be in telegram form, omitting all unessential words .
(e) Blinker .-This is an important signal means in
battle when wire lines are destroyed . It cannot be used
for great distances, and is greatly restricted by fog, mist .,
bright sunshine, or proximity of enemy observation .
Blinker messages must be very short, since 20 words
require about 10 minutes for transmission .
(f) Rockets, Very lights, flares .-These serve as signals
whose meaning has been prearranged and is thoroughly
understood by the troops concerned. Very pistols and
pyrotechnic equipment are carried habitually on light
10 Messenger on horse, 1 kilometer (%ths mile) in 5 to 7 minutes ; automobile
or motorcycle, 30 to 40 kilometers (25 to 31 miles) per hour-on good roads
considerably faster ; bicyclist, 15 to 20 kilometers (12 to 15 miles) per hour .
24 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
telephone carts and also in all combat trains . Ability to
see these signal lights is greatly influenced by the terrain .
Also, there is always the chance of confusion with enemy
signal lights .
(g) Signal flags and panels .- -Prearranged signals with
these means enable ground troops to send short messages,
particularly in-communicating with airplanes and balloons .
(h) Alarms .-Horns, sirens, bells, and gongs are used
for gas or hostile airplane warning.
(i) Signal gun .-This small mortar, which projects a
message container, is useful in position warfare .
(j) ourier pigeons .-Although requiring at least 3
days to orient, courier pigeons are useful under heavy
fire, for they are sensitive to gas, and terrain does not
influence them . They fly about 1 kilometer (518ths
mile) in a minute . They do not fly in darkness, rain, or
storm, and with snow it is difficult for them to orient
themselves .
(k) Message dogs.-Expert and affectionate care by
the men in charge of message dogs results in most satisfactory
returns . Such dogs can be used under heavy
fire, and can remember and find locations on a battlefield
in a radius of about 2 kilometers (1 '4 miles) . They will
efficiently follow an artificially made track (scent) up to
6 kilometers . (about 4 miles) .
(1) Listening-in apparatus.-This apparatus is established
to determine the location of hostile activity in
planting mines, and to listen in on hostile communications .
(m) Airplanes .--An airplane may be used to connect
a division headquarters with its foremost elements or
neighbor units . In such cases, no other reconnaissance
mission should be given the plane . It is important to
PRIN IPLES OF OMMU I ATION
25
establish the location of the foremost line of infantry and
of the hostile line ; the infantry troops on prearranged
signal will display panels to assist the plane on the mission .
Planes may be used for artillery fire direction, and for
maintaining connection between division, cavalry division,
and corps or army headquarters. They are particularly
adapted to distributing quickly important orders or
delivering reports to units a 'considerable distance away .
(n) aptive balloons .-Balloons observe artillery fire,
give prearranged signals indicating the time of the day,
the signal to open fire, etc . Their communication means
include flags, panels, blinkers, and telephones . Weather
conditions, heavy-wooded terrain, and mountainous country
restrict their usefulness .
497735'-42-5
Section VII. ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION
You must thoroughly work yourself into the stituation .
Place upon the situation map the location of your own
'troops and put down the information that you have
about the enemy. This information is built up by
reports from various sources, as suggested above under
the heading " ombat Intelligence," Information must
be evaluated objectively ; one must be extremely careful
not to interpret what is received as one would like it to
be, or as one hoped it would be. A large part of the information
received in war is contradictory, a still greater
part is false, and by far the greatest part is very uncertain .
29. GUIDING PRIN IPLES
arefully read the orders received from the next higher
commander, and consider all information received . In
considering the situation, the following principles govern :
The first and most important principle is to utilize to
the maximum the available means . Any moderation in
this regard is a deterring factor in attaining the ultimate
goal. Second, concentrate as much of your force as
possible where you plan or believe the principal blow (the
main effort) will fall, and expose yourself disadvantageously
at other points, in order to be more certain of
success at the point of the main effort . The success of
the main effort more than compensates for any minor
losses sustained . Third, lose no time . Unless special
26
ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION 27
advantages accrue by delay, it is very important that you
execute your plans as quickly as possible ; through speedy
action many measures of the enemy are nullified in their
initial stages . Finally, you must weigh each situation
independently, restricting yourself only to a consideration
of the essentials . The following questions may here
occur :
Mission.-What is my` mission? Does it require decisive
action or delaying action? Must I fight an independent
action or will I be influenced by the movements
or action of other troops?
Terrain.-What is the condition of terrain between my
troops and the enemy? Which routes lead toward the
enemy? Where does the terrain permit approaches
covered from air or land observation for an attack on the
enemy position? When my mission requires defense,
where does the terrain offer favorable defensive positions?
What possibilities are therefore available for the fulfillment
of my mission?
Enemy.-What can the enemy do to counter my plans"
Where is the enemy now located? " Are there any bases
for his strength and organization? What can he do,
making correct tactical suppositions? 12 Are there any
indications that the enemy has acted incorrectly? Do I
know anything about the ability or personality of the
commander or the condition of his troops? How will the
terrain influence the enemy's action? How can I best
fulfill my mission with the most damage to the enemy?
n Always favor the enemy in computing the distances possibly covered by
the enemy since his position was last reported .
12 Always assume that he will carry outt his plan most disadvanttageously to
you .
28
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
Own troops .-Where are my own troops? Which are
immediately available? Which troops can be later drawn
in? And when? -Are special transportation means such
as a railroad or motor trucks at my disposal? What can
I expect from my troops considering their past performance?
How is the supply situation, especially with regard
to ammurli~ign? Is support from other organizations
possible? Which of the present possible solutions
will give the greatest success?
30. HANGING THE MISSION
As a result of all these considerations, is the accomplishment
of my mission no longer possible? (When, owing
to unavoidable circumstances or unpredictable events, it
is impossible to carry out a mission, then and then only
may I change my mission, and I must then assume full
responsibility for the change . I must select a substitute
mission to assist effectively the general scheme of maneuver.
I must notify at once the next higher commander
in case I decide that it is impossible to carry out my
assigned mission .)
31 . SEIZING THE INITIATIVE
In general, when confronted by a vague situation and
difficult circumstances, as is often the case in war-be
active . Seize and maintain the initiative . Do not expect
or await hints or suggestions from the enemy relative to
your next move.
Section VIII . THE DE ISION
The decision must indicate a clear objective to be
attained by the coordinated and aggressive use of available
means . The strong will ,of the leader must dominate
at all times ; often the stronger will compels victory .
Never let anxiety over personal security interfere or
influence in any manner the real task, which is the annihilation
of the enemy . almly weigh the situation, thinking
quickly but overlooking nothing essential . Insure that
all assistants clearly understand your plans . Nervousness
on your part is quickly reflected by subordinates.
Never hold a council of war . omplication and confusion
are frequently introduced, and generally only an
incomplete decision results. One can think through a
situation much better and reach a definite decision by
independently estimating the situation ."
Once a decision is made, do not deviate, except for
excellent reasons. In this connection, however, one can
bring about disaster by obstinately clinging to the initial
decision when justifiable grounds are present for a change .
The true art of leadership is the ability to recognize when
a new decision is required by the developments or changes
in the situation . The commander should be resolute but
not obstinate .
to The division commander will generally hear the suggestions and proposals
of his chief of staff .
29
Section IX . FIELD ORDERS
Publishing orders is an art that can be learned only by
continual practice . Prompt distribution of faultless
orders furthers 't11e confidence of the troops in the leader
and often has decisive influence in achieving success in
combat, onversely, power in the attack or strength to
resist in the defense can be greatly reduced by faulty
orders .
ommanders of divisions or larger units generally use
written orders . Simple instructions and brief missions
may be communicated orally or through the communications
net, but the text should be simultaneously recorded .
ommanders of units smaller than a division generally use
oral orders, but again, the text must be recorded in writing.
While higher commanders usually make reference
to points or areas on maps, commanders of small units
point out or make such designations actually on the terrain
. Although oral discussions with subordinates may
contribute to clarity, the leader should not . become dependent
upon such discussions . Decisions and orders
remain the direct responsibility of the leader himself.
32 . GENERAL RULES
The following rules embrace accepted fundamentals
and help to gain uniformity: (a) Do not issue orders until
your plan of action is definitely established . (b) Distribute
the order early enough to allow the lower echelons
time for further dissemination and full compliance .
30
FIELD ORDERS 3 1
(c) reate conditions that are conducive to clearness and
conciseness, leaving nothing to mutual agreements . (d)
Place yourself mentally in the shoes of the subordinates
receiving the order . (e) State only what subordinates
must know for the proper performance of their tasks .
(f) Always state definitely whether the combat is to be
attack, delaying action, or defense, and whether the
troops must remain "prepared for action" or whether
they "may rest ." (g) Issue affirmative statements,
avoiding ambiguous or vague expressions and statements
of exaggeration ." (h) Include a brief commendation of
a unit for the execution of a difficult or unusual task,
particularly when troops are ordered to withdraw, to
retire, or to pursue under circumstances difficult for the
troops to comprehend . (i) Use prescribed abbreviations
. (j) Embody pertinent information for each subject,
unit, or weapon in a separate paragraph, underlining
key words or phrases . (k) Number all orders successively,
also the paragraphs within the order .
33 . WARNING ORDERS (VORBEFEHLE)
Warning orders, usually transmitted orally, by telephone,
or by radio, are issued to troops to give advance
information about the will of the commander . The
information contained therein is influenced by existing
circumstances-the time available, the situation with
respect to the enemy and our own troops, etc .-but in
general will include such items as the plan of the commander,
arrangements for reconnaissance and security,
time and place of departures, march destination, bivouacs,
halts, and changes of direction . Warning orders must
14 A statement of conjecture or expectation must be definitely stated as
such.
32 E:RMIANT TA TI AL DO TRINE
be followed as soon as practicable by a complete order or
an individual order .
34. OMPLETE OPERATIONS ORDERS
(GESAMTBEFEHLE)
omplete operations orders present a full survey of the
situation with respect to the enemy and our troops, the
plan of the c6i`f tinder, the role each unit will play, and
pertinent information for the troops . The usual arrangement
follows:
Enemy.-Pertinent information of the enemy, including
strength, dispositions, condition, losses sustained,
defeats suffered, and the commander's expectation of
what the enemy may do.
Own troops.-A brief orientation involving the next
higher units, neighboring units, and special supporting
units.
`. . General plan.-A clear and concise expression of the
plan of the commander (not repetition of the plan of the
next higher commander), to ensure that subordinates
fully understand his intentions .
Detailed plan.-An announcement of the specific details
relating to such matters as reconnaissance, missions,
supply and evacuation, communication, and the command
post."
16 As to reconnaissance, the detailed plan mentions the enemy information
desired, the areas to be reconnoitered and by whom and when, the time and
place where resulting reports are to be sent, and the sequence of reconnaissances
according to their urgdncy . As to missions, what each unit with indicated
attachments or detachments must fulfill is clearly stated . In respect to
supply and evacuation, the definite functioning of agencies in relation to the
combat elements is specified . As regards communication, the axis of communication
for the unit publishing the order is indicated, and special instructions,
such as those pertaining to the use of the radio or existing commercial
nets, are included . As for the command post, the location of the commander's
headquarters and the time when it opens or closes, etc ., are given,
35. SEPARATE ORDERS (EINZELBEFEHLE)
Separate orders (Einzelbefehle) are issued when circumstances
render it impractical or unnecessary to issue a
complete operations order (Gesamtbefehl) . Such circumstances
include situations wherein individual units must
be given specific or special instructions, or where the time
available does not permit the issuance of a complete
operations order . The separate order (Einzelbefehl) contains
the necessary information to insure coordination of
effort ; and later the publication of the complete field order
will include such information, briefly stated, as was sent
out previously in individual orders .
36. SPE IAL INSTRU TIONS
(BESONDERE ANORDNUNGEN)
Special instructions supplement operations orders with
information principally concerning ammunition, communication,
equipment, food supply, transportation, medical
and veterinary service, construction, and civil
population. In general, special instructions are written
and are issued direct to the units or agencies that they
concern.
411173 :i
-:--0
FIELD ORDERS 33
Section X. MAR HES
All arrangements pertaining to a march should be
based upon the premise that the mass of the force must
arrive at the new destination with the minimum effort and the maxiiii aoh secrecy. When contact with the enemy
is imminent, the march formation should favor easy and
rapid development for combat . When contact is unlikely,
the comfort of the command is the important
consideration . In view of modern air developments,
movements under cover of darkness will be the rule
rather than the exception . There will be circumstances
requiring day marches, however ; or they may be safely
undertaken when the weather precludes hostile air
activity .
37. MAR HING IN MULTIPLE OLUMNS
The command should be marched in multiple columns,
using all available routes, thereby saving the strength of
the troops, affording better protection against air attacks,
and maintaining the command in such formation as to
facilitate development for combat . The following considerations,
however, prevail : (a) Organization in depth
permits freedom of maneuver . (b) Echelonment of some
columns on the open flank affords protection or facilitates
later envelopment of the hostile flank when the enemy is
fixed in the front . (c) The strength of columns and the
location of stronger columns will be determined by the
whereabouts of the enemy and by the tactical plan, as
34
MAR HES
35
influenced by the terrain. (d) If'the situation is initially
too vague to determine such dispositions, then several
weak columns should be marched into aggressive action
against the enemy to clarify the situation ; the mass of
the force may then follow in one or more columns . (e)
The width of the advance should not be so broad as to
preclude the building up of a main effort when contact
with the enemy is made . (f) Zones of advance with
boundaries should be indicated . (g) And, lastly, transmission
of orders and reports must be carefully organized,
38. MAR HING IN SINGLE OLUMN
The division sometimes cannot avoid marching in a
single column . The great disadvantage is the extraordinary
length, which precludes assembling for a coordinated
effort in 1 day . An advantage of the single
column over multiple columns is greater security and
flexibility for changing direction .
39. PROTE TION AGAINST AIR ATTA KS
The movements of large forces are protected by antiaircraft
precautions, particularly at initial points, river
crossings, and defiles. Antiaircraft batteries advancing
by bounds are set out in advance to front and flanks to
provide protection at these critical points . The commander
must insure that antiaircraft units have priority
on roads. The danger from air attacks during daylight
is greatly reduced by the following appropriate methods :
Increasing the depth of march columns-At the command
Fliegermarschtiefe! (air defense depth), the troop
units, horse-drawn elements, and other vehicles double
the distances normally maintained on the march . Simul36
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
taneously it is indicated whether security forces, such as
flank or advance guards, maintain, increase, or decrease
distances. Arrangements are made for air defense depth,
if circumstances require such precaution, at the beginning
of the march ; or rest periods may be used to increase or
decrease distances,. With short march columns, extension
or retraction are also accomplished during the march .
Increasing the breadth of march columns .-At the command
Fliegermarschbreite! (air defense breadth), the
troops spread out, using both sides of a highway or
even expanding into the adjacent fields . The formation
invariably imposes march difficulties upon the troops
and is avoided whenever possible . When troops are
already marching in air defense depth, it is seldom
necessary to require the additional precaution of marching
in air defense breadth .
Dividing a column.-Very long columns marching along
a single route are broken up into several short groups
with between 1- and 3-kilometer (%- to 2-mile) intervals .
Disposing of the motorized units .-The motorized units
of the infantry division, except the reconnaissance
battalion or units employed on security missions, are
divided into groups and follow the various columns,
advancing by bounds. If the situation permits, they
are organized into a motorized column and marched on
a special road . Motor vehicles are also marched in the
intervals between the advance guard and the main body,
and between units of the main body .
Averting hostile planes .-Upon the approach of hostile
planes, air guards promptly sound the warning, using prearranged
signals . Marching troops throw themselves
down on, or off to the sides of, the road . Motor vehicles
Q7
halt, and their drivers set the brakes . Mounted troops
clear the road and continue the march under available
cover . Antiaircraft weapons immediately fire upon the,
hostile planes, but riflemen do not fire unless a plane cones
within range . Frequently the troops are put in readiness
to withstand a simultaneous air and gas attack . At night,
if flares are employed by the hostile fliers, foot soldiers
throw themselves to the ground off the roadside . Everyone
else and all vehicles remain absolutely motionless
while antiaircraft artillery provides defense .
40. NIGHT MAR HES
Although night marches initially tax the strength of
troops, this disadvantage is minimized after troops become
adjusted to resting in day bivouacs and eating regularly
on a changed schedule . Night marches have
decided advantages : they `deny altogether or restrict
materially hostile ground and air reconnaissance, and by
keeping the enemy ignorant, they contribute to surprise ;
also, night marches bring troops into position for battle
with fewer losses and consequently higher morale .
In spite of the fact that main highways are often illuminated
with flares by hostile aviators, it is frequently
necessary to utilize highways for marches . If many alternative
parallel routes are available, the principal highways
are avoided, or utilized by motor elements only .
The hour of assembly at the beginning of the march
should come after dark in order to preclude observation
by hostile planes . Troops are formed as for a day march
without extension of distance or expansion of width for
air defense ; but the security forces are drawn in somewhat
38
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
closer, and distances between units are slightly increased
to insure sufficient buffer room . Double connecting
files, sent by the principal unit to the subordinate unit,
or from the rear unit to the forward unit, are liberally
used to maintain contact . The order of march is similar
to the arrangement for a day march . If the tactical
situation permits, -fa'ot troops precede the mounted troops .
On good roads and by starlight or moonlight, the rate of
march is practically the same as that of a day march .
On poor roads or in heavy darkness, the rate decreases to
3 kilometers (just under 2 miles) per hour and even less .
Bicycle troops and motorized units also march appreciably
slower by night than by day . It is advisable to arrange
short rests-about 10 minutes in every hour ; long rest
periods tend to make the troops sleepy .
The alert commander does not march his troops directly
into bivouac if daylight is about to arrive . He halts
them in an available covered area and arranges to have
them divided into small groups before the troops march on
to bivouac or other destination .
41 . DAY MAR HES
When contact with the enemy is at all possible, the
commander must march his command during the day
with "preparedness for combat" as the foremost consideration
. When contact with the enemy is not imminent,
the commander can divide his command and march
the various units on several routes . When time is not
pressing, the movement also can be carried out in small
groups over long periods of time . In any case, the first
consideration in a day march is tactical ; but the possibilities
of cover should not be overlooked . The stronger
MAR HES 39
columns should be marched over the routes offering the
most cover, while the weaker can be sent over the more
open routes . The time of departure on a day march is
.influenced by the situation, the weather, the season, the
length of the intended march, the condition of the troops,
and other factors . It is desirable to march from an old
bivouac area under cover of darkness and reach a new
one by daylight .
42 . ORGANIZATION FOR MAR HING
Infantry marches in columns of three men abreast,
cavalry marches in columns of two abreast (exceptionally
four), and motor vehicles travel in single columns, In
general the right side of the road is used ; but when organizations
are mixed, the infantry should be permitted to
march on the more comfortable side for walking . Within
the infantry division, the commander must organize his
troops for the march so that he can bring all of them to
bear against the enemy, in a concerted attack in a single
day. In order to accomplish this, it may be necessary to
march in two, three, or four columns, with each column
providing its own security . Examples are illustrated by
the following diagrams :
Example ? (Where the division is marching in columns a, b, and c,
and there are no adjacent units)
b
r
Example 2 (Where the division is marching with its left flank open)
MAII 11ES
41
c
Example 3 (Where the division is marching as an interior unit)
Adjacent Unit
Adjacent Unit
ai f
Example 4 (Where there is a containing force and the division is
marching as an enveloping force)
Adjacent Unit
b
ift
}
} Adjacent Unit
I
43 . ONNE TION AND OMMUNI ATION
The commander of a larger unit is responsible for connection
with the next lower ; the smaller units must
cooperate, however, wlien difl-icultios arise . II tcrr,LilI,
or under circumstances, where visibility is restricted,
arrangements for continuous connection are intensified .
On a march in several columns, communication between
the columns is maintained through the most appropriate
available nteans. 1 e
44. RATES OF MAR H
Since it is important to provide conditions which permit
an even rate of march, the mixing of different sorts of
troops should be avoided as much as possible .'7 On good
roads and under favorable conditions the following
average speeds can be accomplished : 1e
Per )Iota
Foot troops 5 Inn (3 mi)
Foot troops (snallunits) Glen (3 ; mi)
Mounted troops (trot and walk) 7 km (4 mi)
Mounted troops (trot) 10 km (6 nti)
Bicyclists 12 kin (7,1h nii)
Motorcyclists 40 km (25 nil)
Large organizations with all weapons :
(1) Including rest periods 4 kin (2 ;-1, mi)
(2) Under stress, without rest periods 5 km (3 mi)
Motorized uiuits-
__. . 30 'kill (IS 111 :1)
1
18 Airplanes (troops expose panels upon signal from the air observer), radio
(when secrecy does not preclude its use), ray lamps, liaison offlccrs (through
the messenger system), wire telephone and telegraph (when contact with the
enemy is imminent), blinker (frequently), and signal flags (soldnm)11 Pack animals are one disturbing factor in waiulaining an ecru rate of
march,
1 8 For foot troops under ordinary conditions the distance prescrihod as a
"buffer" between companies, or similar units, is 10 paces for mounted u •oops
and trains, 15 paces . Such distances do not apply, of course, whoa air defense
depth hays been ordered .
42 GERMAN TA TI AL Do 'rRInE
Intense heat, poor roads, snow, ice, absence of bridges,
and other local conditions greatly influence the march
rate and the travel distance accomplished . The rate for
foot troops on a cross-country or mountainous march
decreases from the normal hourly rate by as much as 2
or 3 kilometers.
When great-distances must be covered rapidly, motor
and rail transportation can be used to expedite marches ;
for distances under 150 kilometers (93 miles) the use of
motor transportation is recommended . When circumstances
require foot or mounted troops to make forced
marches, every effort is made to assist the accomplishment .
Strict march discipline is preserved, and severe measures
are meted out against malingerers . The men are told why
the particular march is being made, and arrangements are
made for rests where refreshments such as hot coffee or
tea will be served . Their packs are carried, if possible, in
trains .
45 . MAR H RESTS
The commander should indicate in the march order all
the necessary information concerning the duration and
other conditions of the march . An officer should be sent
forward to reconnoiter suitable areas for rests . Arrangements
should be made for a short halt, not longer than
15 minutes, to begin after the troops have marched about
2 kilometers (1 14 miles) so that equipment and clothing
may be comfortably readjusted on the men and animals .
The troops remain near the road during such short periods,
spreading out only a sufficient distance to secure cover
from hostile air observation . When a long march is made,
halts are ordered about every 2 hours . Rest periods are
11AR H,1'.,,,S
43
utilized for eating, drinking, feeding animals, and checking
vehicles, The stopping places should be near water
and not too restricted . In summer a rest should be prescribed
during the hottest time of the day. During long
rest periods the troops are arranged in groups ; and when
hostile airplanes approach, the air guards sound the warning
and the troops take cover, remaining motionless,
46. MAR H OUTPOSTS
The security of a force in a rest area is obtained by careful
preparation within the area and by sending out security
forces instructed to conduct reconilaissances, these
cautions being exercised in order to prevent the enemy
from obtaining information about the main force, and ill
order to protect the main force from surprise and give it
time to prepare for combat . According to the degree of
danger, if far from the enemy, simpler precautions may be
taken ; but since the effect of distance has been greatly
reduced by motorization and air operations, the following
principles of outposting should apply :
(a) Employ the minimum number of troops consistent
with the situation . (b) Exploit the natural protective
features of the terrain, particularly if the enemy is liable
to employ armored vehicles ; always establish road !)locks .
(c) By day, maintain observers in points of vantage for
distant viewing of the surrounding terrain . (d) By night,
maintain listening points and patrols on or near all possible
avenues of approach . (e) Provide protection for the
flanks and rear. (f) Establish air guards and a warning
system.
Section XI. VARIOUS TYPES OF BATTLE
The most important types of battle are the attack, the
defense, and the withdrawal, or retreat . A combination
of these types occurs simultaneously or successively in the
course of every major campaign . The commander and
the General Staff Officer must master the fundamental
principles involved in these various forms of tactical
maneuver. Resolute application of these principles may
penetrate, at least will help to neutralize, the ever-present
"fog of war."
44
Section XII . THE ATTA K
The attack may be launched (a) from one direction
against front, flank, or rear ; (b) from several directions
simultaneously ; (c) after penetration, into a new direction .
47. FORMS OF ATTA K
The frontal attack is the most frequent form of attack,
but mechanized and motorized weapons will decrease this
frequency . It requires superiority in strength and produces
decisive results only when the hostile front is
penetrated .
The enveloping attack (envelopment) is the most effective
form of maneuver, and if aggressively employed deep
in the hostile flank or rear, it can result in a most decisive
victory, or even annihilation of the enemy . An envelopment
of both flanks presumes marked superiority in means .
Wide envelopments are more effective than close-in .
Among the factors that contribute to successful envelopments
are deception, concentration of strength at the
critical point, available reserves, mobility, and simplicity
of maneuver. As to surprise, the enemy mist not be
given the time necessary to take countermeasures . As
to mass, strength must be concentrated on the flank of the
envelopment so that hostile extension of the line can be
overrun or circumvented, and hostile defensive moves
quickly and effectively frustrated . As to Jixing the enemy,
45
46 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
the hostile forces- in the front must be contained
simultaneously with the enveloping attack ."
The penetration is an attack where the maneuver is
intended to split or separate the hostile line of resistance .
The following considerations contribute to success : selection
of a favorable point (a weak part of the enemy position,
or favorable-terrain) ; surprise (such as feints at other
points, or secrecy in concentration of strength) ; breadth of
penetration (preferable a base as wide as the depth of
the penetration or wider) ; depth in organization (to
exploit breaking through, and to check hostile counterattacks)
; rapid and full exploitation of the break-through .
The limited objective attack is a form of maneuver intended
to win important terrain features, to contain the
enemy frontally, or to stop the hostile advance . Organization
in depth is not required .
48. ONSIDERATIONS FOR AN ATTA K
Some important general considerations for an attack are
the following : (a) Obtain unity of command and action ;
avoid piecemeal attacks . (b) Establish a main effort .
(c) Assign narrow zones of action . (d) Reinforce fire by
additional artillery and heavy infantry weapons. (e)
oordinate and intensify the fire of all weapons . (f)
Make timely employment of tanks and reserves . (g)
Exploit successes quickly and fully even though the
location of the main effort may properly have to be
io This may be accomplished by point attack (which is both effective, and
economical in troops), by frontal attack (which involves employment of
considerable force and thereby reduces the troops available for the main
effort), and by attack with limited objective (which requires a smaller force
and releases more troops for the main effort) .
THE ATTA K 4
changed .G° (h) Recognize the crisis in a battle and react
appropriately .
Be alert to every advantage, to each success no matter
how small, to any mistakes made by the enemy-and
exploit these to the fullest degree, If the attack appears
definitely stopped by strong hostile resistance at a certain
point, further success may be better accomplished by
injecting fresh troops, by concentrating fires on a different
area, or by changing the disposition of troops .
49. ME HANI S OF ATTA K
The width of a zone of action is dependent upon terrain
and mission . A battalion of infantry with both flanks
protected is assigned a zone of action 400 to 1,000 meters
(roughly 440 to 1,100 yards) wide. An infantry division
in a meeting engagement where terrain is favorable for
employment of supporting weapons, is assigned a zone of
action 4,000 to 5,000 meters (4,400 to 5,500 yards) wide ;
but an infantry division having both flanks protected and
making the main effort against a strong hostile position is
assigned a zone of action of 3,000 meters (3,281 yards) .
A definite objective or direction must be indicated for
the attack. Although zones of action are prescribed, they
need not be completely filled with troops . For divisions
and larger units, these zones are selected from the map ;
for the smaller units, they are determined by inspection of
the terrain itself. The boundaries are extended deep
enough into hostile territory to preclude mixing of units
for the duration of the day's operation . Strongpoints and
10 For example, in passing an obstacle-river or mountain chain-the main
effort many be switched during the progress of the operation bereuso of a
break-through in an unexpected point .
48 GDRIViAN TA TI AL TDRIONE
difficult terrain must be included within a unit's zone of
action and not located on its boundary line . Frequently
only the designation of an objective is required in order to
maintain direction and to preclude mixing of organizations
.
Do not include too much detail in the attack order and
thus restrict in tiati,ve . The mission must be clear-what
to do, but not how to do it .
The important task of all weapons is to enable the
infantry to close with the enemy and to drive deep into his
position in order to crush all resistance or to annihilate him .
This end can be accomplished only if the hostile automatic
weapons and artillery are neutralized or destroyed . oordination
between infantry and artillery must at all times
and in all situations be carefully arranged.
When tanks and infantry are operating together, they
both should be initially assigned the same objective,
namely, the hostile artillery . Tanks can often attack
from a different direction . The coordination of other
weapons of the division attacking with tanks is based on
the activities of the latter, The division commander is
responsible for such coordination . Artillery supports the
tank attack by firing upon antitank weapons, blinding
hostile observation, and neutralizing villages and edges of
woods . Artillery fire must be carefully observed and controlled
to preclude firing upon friendly tanks and advancing
troops. Engineer troops remove tank obstacles and
assist tank units forward . The air force provides connection
between the fast-moving tank units, the division,
and the artillery . ombat aviation may be employed to
neutralize antitank weapons .
Antiaircraft troops protect the deployment of troops,
'fu: ATTA K 4IJ
positions of readiness, artillery positions, and battle
reconnaissance planes . The main effort must receive the
bulk of antiaircraft protection . Gas may be used against
artillery and reserves, and in connection with road blocks
or blockades on an open flank . The communications net
will be based upon the plan of maneuver ; separate nets
for artillery and infantry will be established, the artillery
net having priority .
50 . ATTA KING A POSITION
The plan of attack will be determined by the situation,
the morale of the enemy, and the extent of his defensive
works. Approach to the hostile position may be possible
only under cover of darkness . If the position cannot be
turned or enveloped, then a penetration must be made
through some point in the front . The employment of
inadequate force and means leads to severe reverses .
areful plans for the attack must include the necessary
information about the enemy and the terrain 21 Thorough
reconnaissance must be conducted by the officers of all
arms, but reconnaissance parties must be kept restricted
in size. Air reconnaissance is of particular value . Observation
and listening posts must be established . Limitedobjective
attacks, strong combat patrols, and similar
methods may be necessary to gain the information desired
.
The location of the main effort will be determined by
friendly intentions, the situation, the defensive strength
21 The following points should be clarified : Where are the eneun's advanced
positions, outpost lines, main line of resistance, switch positions,
reserves, and observation posts? Where does the terrain favor the approach
and the attack? Where has the enenIV employed gas and obstacles?
50 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
of the hostile position, the covered approaches, and the
observation for supporting weapons, particularly the
artillery. In selecting a place for a penetration or breakthrough,
consider the following points :
(a) Find out how the attack can be further developed
after the initial break-through . (b) Insure sufficient room
for maneuver . (e~'Avoid natural strongpoints or envelop
them . (d) Locate favorable terrain for the employment
of tanks. (e) apture points or areas that will give
good observation deep into hostile positions . (f) Designate
close or far-distant objectives according to the size
of the attacking unit : if the final objective cannot be
reached in one advance, designate intermediate objectives
involving in some cases limited-objective attacks .
51 . ARTILLERY EMPLOYMENT
Under the protection of advance infantry units, the
artillery will be brought forward. Prompt reconnaissance
of the terrain must be carefully made by artillery officers
in small groups . If possible, positions for the batteries
should be so placed that the artillery mission may be
.carried out without change of locations . Ammunition
supply, observation, hostile position, communications,
alternate positions, and range must all be considered,
and any necessary preparations carried out in advance.
The distribution of the artillery will be determined by
its mission . Units Will usually be employed intact ; it
may, however, be necessary to detach batteries, particularly
the heavy artillery. In very narrow division sectors,
for example, heavy howitzer batteries may be taken away
from divisions to operate against distant targets under
corps.
TILL ATTA K J1
The initial mission of the artillery may include any
or all of the following : firing upon important targets in
the battlefield, drawing the fire of hostile artillery, engaging
in counterbattery work against hostile artillery and antiaircraft
batteries as early as possible, and firing upon
large hostile group movements at maximum ranges and
as promptly as possible .
52. INFANTRY POSITION OF READINESS (BEREIT.
STELLUNG)
The following considerations for an infantry "position of
readiness" may be listed as follows :
(a) Avoid too close proximity to the enemy position in
cases where no cover is available to friendly troops . (b) If
the enemy has previously offered strong resistance in the
fighting, if there is reason to avoid premature entrance
into the effective hostile defensive area, or if the enemy
situation in the main battle position is not clarified, have
the troops partially developed before they are conducted
forward in their respective zones of action . (c) Avoid
hostile air and ground obstruction by prohibiting large
assemblies in restricted areas, by exploiting all ground folds
and available cover, and by approaching inunediately
prior to the jump-off as close to the hostile position
cover permits . (d) Select the infantry jump-off position
as close as possible to the hostile position in order to permit
the artillery to push well forward and carry out its mission
without changing location .12 (e) Establish local security
1% When the terrain and available cover do not permit the close approach of
the infantry, the artillery must be echeloned to the rear and prepared to
support the infantry advance on the enemy position .
52 GERMAN TA TI AL TDRIONE
with infantry detachments . (f) Gain sufficient depth by
drawing out and retaining reserves to the rear . (g) If the
forces going into the position of readiness are scheduled
to make a close-in envelopment, insure that the position
is a sufficient distance off to the side to preclude the
enveloping force advancing into and mixing with other
friendly troops on the flank, when the attack is launched .
53 . INFANTRY A TION UP TO THE FIRST ASSAULT
The infantry action up to the first assault is carried out
under the support of artillery and heavy infantry weapons .
If exceptionally strong artillery support is available, the
infantry can more freely advance against the enemy
position ; if the artillery support is not strong, however,
then the infantry must advance cautiously . In the latter
case, moving forward under cover of darkness or of smoke,
the infantry takes advantage of cover to avoid hostile
observation and of defiladed ground to avoid hostile fire .
The infantry attack begins with the advance of the
light weapons under cover of the fire of artillery and
heavy infantry weapons . Part of the latter should be
pushed forward with the initial echelons to insure continual
close support . Riflemen work forward through
the use of fire and movement . Local fire superiority
must be exploited to the fullest degree to capture ground .
Those units or parts of units which cannot advance
farther should dig in and hold tenaciously the ground
already won . When weak points in the hostile position
are found, they should be attacked aggressively and with
reserves. Thus a push forward can be made . Against
consolidated and extensive defensive works on the other
hand, the infantry may struggle for days, working slowly
'1'11E ATTA K 53
forward . Trenches and terrain may be won, lost ., anfl
rewon during the course of the action .
54. ARTILLERY SUPPORT OF THE INFANTRY ADVAN
E
The effectiveness of counterbattery missions directed
by the artillery commander depends upon observation
and available ammunition . Neutralization was often accomplished
in World War I by a simultaneous concentration
of several batteries using gas shells . Initially,
rmany batteries may be concealed in a firing position
awaiting the opportunity to surprise the enemy . When
new hostile batteries are discovered or additional enemy
forces 13 are located, then concentrated fire may be delivered
upon them with these batteries . This method is
much more economical in ammunition than continual fire
of all artillery against apparent but not definitely identified
targets .
As the situation develops and clarifies, artillery fire eon
be switched from the manifestly less important targets to
the more important areas . The infantry will sometimes
be unavoidably delayed in its advance by reason of changes
in the infantry-artillery plan of coordination . There will
be situations in which many hostile batteries will not be
located until friendly infantry has pushed forward and
drawn fire .
55 . INTERMITTENT ADVAN E OF THE RESERVES
At the disposal of the commander, the reserves follow
beyond range of hostile fire . When the terrain permits,
~' Artillery engages the hostile infantry which is fighting on the flank or
in front of friendly infantry,
04 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
their advance should be made by bounds from cover
to cover.
56. BREAK-THROUGH
a. Penetration of the Hostile Position
The timing of the assault is determined either by the
forward echelons-or by the commander himself . No hard
and fast rule can be applied . Should the foremost units
recognize the opportunity to push through, they must take
full and quick advantage, calling upon supporting
weapons for intensified fire to support their assault .
When the infantry is observed advancing rapidly on the
hostile position, this increased support may under certain
circumstances occur automatically . Should the commander
order the assault-avoiding an elaborate planhe
must quickly concentrate his strength at the point
of penetration .
b. Time of Attack
Daybreak is often considered the most favorable time
to gain surprise for the attack . War experience indicates,
however, that daybreak is the time of highest alertness,
and it is better to change continually the hour of attack .
The time of attack should usually be postponed if the
artillery has not completed all of its preparations . An
attack against a position must be supported by artillery
which is fully prepared to carry out its missions . In
order to penetrate a stubbornly defended main line of
resistance, concentrations of fire by all weapons must be
arranged.
. Enemy Withdrawals
If the enemy withdraws to rearward positions (a move
generally accomplished at night), the following action
TILL ATTA K JO
should be taken : (a) Maintain close contact with the
hostile infantry . (b) Promptly reconnoiter the new hostile
positions . (c) Move the artillery well forward, (d) Prepare
for hostile counterattacks . (e) On the following day,
push rapidly forward with all force ; compel the enemy
to stand and fight, to take flight, or to suffer destruction .
57. A TION RE OMMENDED FOR ERTAIN SPE IAL
ASES
If the enemy has had only a short time in which to
prepare his defensive position, if the morale of the enemy
is shaken, or if the possibility of surprise is introduced,
the preparations for attacking a position may be shortened
to limited reconnaissance, more rapid development and
preparation by the artillery, and employment of tanks
and smoke screens.
If the enemy resorts to delaying action, the response
should be to break through his line at one point and
exploit the break with strong force, and to press closely
upon the withdrawing hostile troops .
If the enemy falls behind the cover of a very strong
position, the direction or location of the main effort should
be changed . Knowledge of the terrain will permit advance
planning in this maneuver . More artillery, tanks, and
engineer troops should be moved well forward, and minimum
requirements should be established in the communication
system . If the enemy succeeds in falling back
upon an entirely new and very strong defensive position,
a regrouping of the attacking forces and new plans may
be required.
56 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
If the attack continues until nightfall without producing
decisive results, the regrouping of the command
should be carried on under cover of darkness . The day's
battle experience may indicate a new point for the main
effort, and the order for attack should be issued just as
early as possible . Reconnaissance must be energetic and
continued, for the-enemy will also make changes in his
disposition during darkness. Night attacks are useful
in determining hostile intentions and movements, in
seizing favorable positions for the following day's jumpoff,
and in obtaining observation . Harassing fire by the
artillery and air night-bombing attacks should be scheduled
. Artillery support may not be possible at dawn of
the following day, unless the exact enemy positions have
been located. Only then can the artillery deliver unobserved
supporting fires . Sufficient light for artillery
observations should be awaited in preference to sending
the infantry forward unsupported . Artillery on other
fronts may be fired for deceptive purposes during the
interval of waiting .
Passing over to the defense from the attack may be a
necessary prelude to holding captured ground, or may be
ordered by higher authority. Troops in either case are
reorganized, and unnecessary forces withdrawn . Artillery
must protect the relief of friendly infantry by heavy
concentrations and counterbattery fire .
58 . MEETING ENGAGEMENT
a . Speed and Surprise
In a meeting engagement, it is possible (though improbable
with modern far-reaching reconnaissance and
intelligence means) that the first information of the
THE AITA K Or
presence of the enemy will he received through actual
contact . Initially the situation is vague and the security
of both forces uncertain . A meeting engagement must
not be permitted to develop into a wild rush upon the
hostile per,ition ; a coordinated plan must be carried out,
calmly, but so accelerated as to carry out the following
considerations : (a) Seize the initiative and fix the hostile
force insofar as the situation permits . (b) Expedite
preparations for the attack, quickly occupying ground
favorable for observation, development, and advance, and
for supporting weapons. (c) Intensify reconnaissance,
ground and air, to determine promptly the enemy's
dispositions, strength, intentions, and weaknesses . (d)
Surprise the enemy, principally by rapidity of movement
and by screening your troops and movements prior to
entrance into battle .
6 . Time and Space
The advance guard of each march column must provide
time and space for development by the main body. An
energetic advance under cover of the advance guard
artillery often seizes important terrain features to the
front and flanks, and fixes the hostile force . By extending
over a broad front with its infantry and artillery, the
advance guard can deceive the enemy relative to strength
and movements .
c. oordination
In a meeting engagement in open terrain and when the
enemy has excellent observation, it is necessary to develop
and prepare for combat much earlier than otherwise .
The location of the main effort is promptly communicated
to the various columns, and they deploy in keeping with
58 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
the general plan .in order to insure coordination of
effort. The prompt employment of additional artillery
support should be coordinated with the general scheme of
maneuver.
d . Methods
In attacking during a meeting engagement, alternative
methods exist for utilizing the main body : (a) prompt
employment as the units of the march columns reach the
immediate combat area ; (b) development, and occupation
of a position of readiness from which the attack will be
launched . In the first case, the units will be issued
individual orders as they arrive ." All unit commanders
must insure coordination between their infantry and supporting
weapons . In the second case, the attack will be
conducted similarly to an attack against an enemy in
position. It will not be advantageous to push through
an attack immediately if the terrain is difficult or if the
employment of the mass of the force on the same day is
no longer possible . The action of neighboring units must
also be taken into consideration .
59. PURSUIT
The absolute disregard of all factors except the annihilation
of the hostile force will govern the conduct of the
pursuit. The most important principles involved are to
harass continually the hostile force in front and on the
flanks, and to block the avenues of retreat . It is most
important that the intention of the enemy to withdraw
s+ The situation may so develop that the immediate employment of units
as they arrive will not be necessary . The remainder will then be first moved
into positions of readiness .
THE ATTA K 59
be promptly recognized . 2 \When such recognition becomes
definite, the commander will immediately employ
all available force and spare no effort in order to annihilate
the enemy . Premature pursuit can result disastrously ; on
the other hand, if the withdrawing enemy is permitted
time in which to break off combat, an opportunity for
decisive victory may be lost ; the commander must therefore
carefully consider the situation and evaluate the
information prior to committing his troops to the pursuit,
ommanders of subordinate units in the forward echelon
push energetically forward when the enemy gives way .
The presence of higher commanders in these forward
units spurs the troops to greater effort .
Some of the important considerations for conducting
successful pursuits are : (a) Employ airforce units against
large bodies of hostile retreating troops ; use reconnaissance
planes to determine direction of withdrawal and use
diving attacks with machine guns and bombs upon troops
and materiel in marching columns, especially in defiles
and against bridges. (b) Employ artillery in harassing
missions . Let part of the long-range artillery pound
vigorously on potential avenues of withdraw tI, roads,
etc., and keep the bulk of the artillery leap-flogging
rapidly, pressing close behind the friendly infantry to
render support . (c) Employ infantry in pushing rapidly
forward literally on the heels of the withdrawing enemy' ;
assign distant objectives in the direction of the withdrawal
; have the heavy infantry weapons follow closely
the forward echelon ; and give the energy no time to organ-
' lues may be derived from airplane reports of rearward movements of
trains, supply, echelons, and reserves ; from reports from friendly troops ; and
from patrolling, particularly at night, and miscellaneous signal interceptions .
60
ize a defense . (d) Employ engineers to repair roads in
the rear of the pursuing forces, to remove obstacles, and
to neutralize gassed areas .
While the 'frontal attack is vigorously carried out,
enveloping forces of great mobility 26 will operate from
flank and rear against the hostile retreating columns .
Defiles, bridges, and favorable observation deep in rear
of the enemy will be seized, and avenues of retreat cut off .
If the enemy succeeds in organizing a delaying position,
a coordinated attack must be promptly arranged and
launched.
ommanders must insure a continual flow of supplies
for the rapidly advancing units . In pursuit, matters of
supply and evacuation require particularly careful supervision
.
Pursuing troops must maintain contact with the enemy,
and must report back frequently to headquarters their
own locations . If the pursuit continues into the night,
infantry units push forward along the roads . Artillery
continues long-range harassing fire, while individual batteries
follow the infantry in close proximity for rendering
immediate support .'
ss Motorized infantry, mounted troops, motorized engineers, and antitank
and antiaircraft units,
27 Artillery firing at night under such conditions is, of course, map firing .
GERL`A' TA TI AL DO TRINE Section XIII . THE DEFENSE
The important considerations of defense are combined
in utilization of terrain and coordination of fire . The
natural defensive characteristics of the terrain should he
improved, and camouflage should be used freely . A
fully coordinated use of all available weapons must be
arranged ; strength should be conserved by keeping the
losses in personnel and materiel down to the very minimum;
and exact dispositions, strength, and intentions
should be denied to the enemy as long as possible, A
well-organized defense capable of quickly and effectively
reverting to the attack, with cunning and deception
enshrouding the movements and dispositions, will offset
hostile numerical superiority,
60. FAVORABLE TERRAIN FOR DEFENSE
The defender has an advantage in that he selects the
terrain for his battle . Rarely will all of the following
terrain requirements for defense exist in a single combat,
area, but certain of them will be present, and the commander
may improvise the others : (a) good observation
for artillery and other supporting weapons ; (h) protection
against hostile observation ; (c) natural obstacles against
tank attacks ; (d) natural protection for flanks ; (e) possibility
for launching counterattacks .
61
62 GERMAN TA TI AL TPIIE
61 . OTHER ONSIDERATIONS
a . Defense or Delaying Action?
The mission must clearly indicate the form of defense
contemplated : defense (Verteidigung), meaning that the
position will be held under all circumstances ; or delaying
action (Hinhaitender Widerstand) . Fire may be opened
either at maximum-effective ranges, if the ammunition
is ample, or at closer ranges, in order to effect surprise .
b. Preparation of Defense Area
When the hostile situation has not been clarified
(especially if the direction of the enemy's attack is
unknown), the mass of the defending force should be
retained in a position of readiness . When information
relative to hostile formations, main effort, strength, etc .,
becomes, available, then the troops may be moved into
defensive positions which have been previously reconnoitered
and prepared according to the time available and
the situation . Occasionally only a skeleton position will
be occupied with artillery protected by small units of
infantry, while the mass is held back centrally located so
that it can quickly occupy positions upon the approach
of the enemy .
c. Maneuvers
Advanced positions and outposts delay him and give
time for the occupation and preparation of favorable
defense terrain . Reserves are used for flank protection,
for counterattacks, and for blocking penetrations . Fire
power must never be weakened by holding out unnecessarily
large reserves . If, after contact with the enemy, the
situation requires defensive maneuver, the position is
T E !)EFENsE t)V
quickly organized as the troops deploy, and if the, terrain
is not particularly favorable, the troops are drawn back to
better defensive terrain .
62. GENERAL PRIN IPLES OF DEFENSE
Some of the general principles of defense can be summarized
as follows : (a) The purpose of the defense is to
nullify the hostile attack . (b) The position selected is
held to the last ; the commander nay under certain circumstances,
however, restrict the time . (c) The defensive
position selected must compel the enemy either to
attack, relinquish the advance, or attempt to avoid colttbat
.28 (d) Hostile envelopments are countered by extending
or refusing the flank (or flanks), or by echeloninent
of reserves. (e) If the enemy attempts to utarclh
around in order to avoid the position entirely, then he
should be attacked .
63 . ORGANIZATION OF DEFENSE AREAS
a . Defense in Depth
The main battle position is organized in depth to
accomplish dense all-around fires and effectively limit hostile
penetrations . Local withdrawals before superior
hostile fire may be authorized by the regimental commander
to his battalion commanders, or, in special cases,
by the latter to their subordinates ; local withdrawals must
not, however, permit the loss of connection between units,
in the line or hostile penetration into the main battle zone .
In terrain not too unfavorable for the defense, units
as This can he accomplished it the position cuwot ie eiitirei I n1uided of enveloped by the enemy,
64 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
occupy fronts double the width of those assigned for the
attack . These islands of resistance are so organized as to
permit all-around defense, with weapons so sighted as to
cover all possible avenues of approach at maximum ranges .
The defensive zone is organized in depth, with the main
line of resistance in front of the terrain that is favorable
for observation posts-for the artillery and heavy supporting
weapons . The higher commander selects the general
defensive line on the map and assigns sectors to units .
Subordinate commanders carefully reconnoiter the terrain
and select the locations for their troops and various types
of weapons.
b . over and Obstacles
over for machine-gun emplacements, observation
posts, and accompanying weapons is provided . Obstacles
are constructed to supplement the natural defensive
characteristics of the terrain. Priorities of defensive
works are governed by the rule that "effectiveness of fire
takes priority over cover." The normal order of tasks is
the following :29 (a) clearing fields of fire and establishing
distances to increase the efficiency of fire ; (b) camouflaging
installations and erecting dummy establishments ;
(c) constructing splinter cover for observation posts ;
(d) constructing machine-gun emplacements ; (e) erecting
barbed wire or other obstacles ; (f) excavating dugouts,
switch positions, or planned communication routes .
64 . RESERVES, RELIEFS, AND REAR POSITIONS
Local reserves are used to fill in gaps in the line, to
counterattack against a local penetration, and to relieve
Y° Several of these tasks, such as camouflaging, nay be undertaken concurrently
with other tasks .
THE DEFENSE 65
troops in the front line . General reserves are used too
protect a flank, to counterattack against a serious penetration,
to counterattack when the situation indicates a
return to offensive tactics, and to relieve organizations
in the line .
A relief is only effected after a long period of defense,
and under cover of darkness . Infantry and artillery are
never relieved simultaneously . The relief order directs
when and where the relief is to report, the routes to be
used by the relieving force and the troops relieved ; and
the time when the new commander is definitely to assume
responsibility for the sector .
Only necessary under exceptional circumstances, rear
positions must be located sufficiently back from the main
line of resistance to require the enemy artillery to move
forward. A rear position will be ordered occupied by
the commander when the former position can be held only
with unjustifiable losses and when consideration for adjacent
units does not forbid.
65 . A TUAL OPERATION OF THE DEFENSE
a . Main Line of Resistance
All fires along the main line of resistance and in the
principal defensive zone are carefully coordinated to insure
that all areas, particularly the potential avenues of approach,
are covered by strong concentrations . Artillery
and infantry are coordinated to permit a rapid switch
from one area to another ; and fire plans are prepared to
limit penetrations and to block envelopments,
Defensive preparations are secured from hostile observation
by active reconnaissance and by a screening force,
both of which operate under the same colnnmander.
66
GERM AN TA TI AL DO TRINE
Generous use of obstacles, natural and constructed, is
made . The advanced troops are under direct control of
the commander ; after fighting in delaying action before
superior enemy forces, they withdraw to rearward positions
as prearranged by him .
b . Advance Position
The advance position, usually located within the sphere
of operation of friendly long-range artillery in the main
battle position, is occupied to prevent the early seizure of
important terrain features by the enemy . amouflage
and dummy works are used freely . The advance position
increases the effectiveness and the time of employment of
long-range artillery by protecting advanced, artillery
observation posts ; also, such a position deceives the enemy
relative to the dispositions and organization for defense,
and causes him to deploy prematurely . Friendly troops
must withdraw before the enemy can overrun the position .
In withdrawing, prearranged routes will be indicated to
insure that the fire of weapons located in the next position
to the rear (outpost line of resistance) is not masked .
c . Outpost Position
The outpost position, located within the sphere of operation
of the light artillery batteries in the main position,
is selected to provide time for troops manning the main
defensive position to prepare for action, to supplement
observation, and to deceive the attacker relative to dispositions
. Troops from infantry units immediately to the
rear generally occupy this line and are withdrawn by
signal according to prearranged plan so that fields before
the main line of resistance are not obstructed . Artillery
delays the hostile approach by the use of harassing fires
THIE DEFENSE 67
controlled by radio reports from advanced observation
posts . To increase radius of action, a few light batteries
may be advanced forward to locations between the outpost
line and the advance position .
66 . ARTILLERY IN THE DEFENSE
a . ontrol 6y Artillery ommander
The commander of the whole defensive force determines
the proportion of artillery to be held in direct support
and the proportion to be attached to infantry units .
Artillery is kept as far as possible under the control of the
artillery commander, who under all circumstances retains
control of the mass of the division artillery . If the situation
permits and there is an ample ammunition supply,
heavy fires may be delivered at long ranges .
6. Tactics
In the initial stages of a defensive action, artillery Iiw
sometimes be kept silent to facilitate deception : otl -Ier`~
it will be employed to draw hostile artillery fire, to deliver
counterbattery fires, or to bring down harassing fires en
the approaching hostile infantry . In the advanced stages
of a defensive action, the bulk of the artillery is used to
deliver concentrations on hostile positions of readiness,
and particularly on hostile heavy infantry vv'capons ; the
remainder ir, used to deliver counterbattery fire . And in
the final stage---when the hostile force is on the pmint of
launching its assault--the artillery delivers preparations
and barrages upon the hostile assault .
c. Barrage
Should the enemy make a surprise attack at night ov in
a fog, a barrage of all weapons is delivered irnunediately in
68 GERMAN TA 'T'I AL DO TRINE
front of the plain line of resistance . Definite restrictions
relative to coverage and duration of fire are issued ." As a
rule, heavy artillery does not participate .
67 . INFANTRY IN THE DEFENSE
With part of their heavy weapons, the infantry opens
fire upon the approaching enemy at good distance ; if
friendly artillery support is weak, at maximum ranges .
Firing positions are located in advance of the main line of
resistance or in the forward part of the defensive area . As
the enemy draws closer, he is engaged by the fire of all the
defending heavy weapons, and finally by the fire of all
available weapons . The infantry fills up gaps in the line,
recapturing any sections temporarily lost .
68 . HOSTILE PENETRATIONS
Where small groups of the enemy have broken through,
the groups should be destroyed immediately . Box
barrages placed in their rear will preclude their withdrawal
. When a successful break-through of large proportions
has been accomplished by the enemy, the commander
of the defensive force will decide whether the
position will be shifted or the lost ground regained by
counterattack . If he decides to counterattack, the fires
of all weapons are carefully coordinated, a limited objective
is assigned, and air and tank support is provided .
69. THE OUNTERATTA K
It is most important that the psychological moment be
recognized for the counterblow . The commander is ever
ao In this connection a light howitzer battery (105-mm) can cover about 160
meters (175 yards) ; a light battalion, about 500 meters (550 yards) .
THE DEFENSE O!)
alert for indications ." The counterattack plan resenlhle~,
a limited-objective attack in which artillery support,
boundaries, and objectives are specified . Any objective
selected must be a decisive terrain feature.
70. WITHDRAWAL TO A REARWARD POSITION
Advance orders are issued to effect a withdrawal, thus
ensuring coordination . ontact, with adjacent units is
maintained . The movement to the rear is effected under
cover of darkness ." Activity on the original position will
be simulated to deceive the enemy . Firing by part of the
infantry and artillery will be continued from the forwardd
position to give the enemy the impression that it is still
being strongly defended . The hostile advance upon the.
new (renewed) position will be delayed by the fire of
artillery and heavy weapons, supplemented by Iuealr; of
poison gas and obstacles .
ai Hostile repulses, heavy losses, enemy errors, morale of thr t
ni%, .r
morale of friendly troops .
"Daylight uithdratvals are only attempted under cover of fog, artificial
or natural, or over terrain of very restricted visibility, whim the ~iUmtinu
definitely indicates that it will he dangerous to wait, until darkne?s .
Section XIV. THE DELAYING A TION
The purpose of a delaying action is to effect maximum
delay to the enemy without committing the friendly force
to decisive action . It is employed to avoid breaking before
superior hostile force ; to gain time or to improve the
situation with reference to observation, cover, and field
of fire : and to maneuver the enemy into a position in
which lie may be more effectively attacked, If a transition
from defense to delaying action is imperative, the
first position selected should be at least 6 miles to the
rear. A fully coordinated attack by the enemy can be
checked by causing him to displace his artillery and to
reorganize generally before he launches a new attack .
The characteristic organization for delaying action includes
the following considerations : (a) Successive defensive
lines are selected with sufficient intervals to cause
displacelnent of the enemy's artillery . (b) Positions
selected should permit distant observation and effective
use of long-range weapons, and have cover in the rear to
facilitate withdrawal . (c) Natural obstacles are fully exploited
and supplemented by constructed obstacles and
by the use of poison gas. (d) The bulk of the artillery,
along with the long-range artillery, is held under the
artillery commander for long-range interdiction and
counterbattery missions . (e) Resistance in the forward
position is continued until the next rearward position is
occupied and fully prepared to carry on the defense .
(f) Units are deployed over very broad fronts and
70
with no depth .'
(g) Sniall reserves are retained . ihi
Reserves are utilized to cover the withdrawal i,urticulaily
by daylight (according to the situation and terrain, they
may be located off to a flank or on a commanding piece
or terrain, which facilities the protection of the unit,
drawing) . (ti) When the situation permits, withdrawals
are always made under cover of darkness ; sometinies, even
at the risk of being involved in serious action requiring
a strong defense, the situation should be held until
darkness.
33 In favorab4, terrain a unit may occupy a riclur Luicv a, a~ i,
normal for defense . In heavily wooded arena or whoa vikihilit v i~ r~tI ictc~f,
the sectors are narrower .
THB7 DN11A I:A'G :ktPrloA' 71
Section XV . RETREAT-RETIREMENT
In a retreat-retirement, contact with the enemy is
broken off for the purpose of seeking more favorable
terrain or conditions for the resumption of offensive
action . A commander may be forced by the trend of
circumstances to retire, or he may, of his own free will,
elect to retire . Only the greatest emergency is considered
to justify retreat . Local reverses should not be taken
seriously . No second-in-command upon receipt of unfavorable
information is authorized to order a retreat .
If the situation indicates the necessity, he must report to
a higher commander and state his intentions to retire
with the reasons therefor.
A retreat should be effected under cover of darkness,
with the greatest secrecy . If troops are told the purpose-
to improve their future chance of success-their
morale will not be adversely affected . Fresh troops if
available should be given the mission of rear and flank
guards to protect the assembly and movement of the
command . If the enemy is employing motorized or
mechanized troops, special provision will have to be
made to protect the Hanks with antitank weapons and
road blocks.
72
Section XVI . THE EMPLOYMENT OF FIELD
ARTILLERY
The division artillery coma antler is a sped 11 url` isor
to the division commander on artillery employnmnt,
replacement, and ammunition ; he is also conunander of
the artillery regiment, which includes the medium howitzer
battalion, the sound-and-flash battalion, and such artillery
as may be attached . He orders artillery concentrations,
counterbattery, and harrassing fire in cooperation with
the general scheme of maneuver and in support of the
infantry .
The artillery battalion is the fire unit. The battalion
commander indicates definitely to his batteries such
matters as the following : targets, aiming points, amounts
of ammunition to be fired, time for opening fire, location
of positions, ammunition supply, routes, types of fire,
and kinds of ammunition . Firing data are obtained for
the battalion by ranging shots, map computations, operations
of the observation battalion (sound-and-flash), and
references furnished by friendly troops . In very wide
sectors or when operating in terrain of restricted visihility,
it may be necessary for certain batteries to obtain
firing data individually according to their tactical missions,
71 . ORGANIZATION
Part of the artillery, usually the light howitzers, has
the principal mission of providing direct support to the
infantry . The remainder is employed in counterbattery,
73
74
GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRII E
harassing fires and preparations, concentrations, and interdictions
. lose connection with the sound-and-flash battalion
is maintained . Disposition must be kept flexible
to permit quick shifting of battery positions, missions,
and targets . The employment in general is determined
by these considerations : (a) number and kinds of guns
available ; (b) combat plans of the command as a whole ;
(c) terrain and weather ; (d) hostile artillery ; (e) ammunition
available . I Main
effort
I
Infantry regiment
Battalion
(light
howitzers
Bat tolion
(light
howitzers)
Infantry regiment
/////////////////
4-44
44*
Battalion
Battalion
(light
(heavy
howitzers)
howitzers)
Artillery
commander
Figure 1 .
Artillery in a division attack .
715
72. LO ATION IN THE ATTA K,
In general, in the attack the artiiicry is beat(tl innmediately
in rear of the infantry line, just beyond range
of hostile small-arms fire . Figure 1 shows a typical
arrangement, with the observation battalion (sound-andflash)
operating directly under the artillery eoninander .
If reconnaissance and combat intelligence have given
definite information about hostile dispositions, then a
preparation may be fired, continuing 10 to 30 minutes,
and depending upon the ammunition available, the . surprise
effect, and the situation . In the case wlhere practically
no information on the enemy is available, the
artillery preparation is omitted ; the infantry launches the
attack, drawing fire from hostile heavy weapons aril
artillery, upon which, once located, the friendly artillery
can thereafter fire .
73 . LO ATION IN THE DEFENSE
Artillery in the defense is organized the same, way ats iu
the attack . The only difference in . dispositions is that
the direct support weapons (light howitzers) are located
slightly farther to the rear, and the general support gusts
(medium hoe-itzers) are in a central location where they
can interdict at long ranges to force an early deploiuuunt
of approaching enemy formations .
74. OOPERATION WITH INFANTRY
Time and space must be carefully coordinated by but,h
the infantry and the artillery. It is essential that the
artillery observers be at all times alert, not only to locate
targets and hostile forces but to follow closely the movements
of friendly troops, particularly the infantry . To
76 GEIlSIA.N TA TI AL DO TIUNE
facilitate this close contact, it devolves upon the infantry
to seize and hold terrain which offers excellent observation
for the artillery . ommunication is effectively maintained
. lose contact between infantry and artillery
officers is absolutely essential . The division commander
indicates, as promptly as possible, the plan of maneuver
to the artillery commander so as to permit the latter the
maximum freedom-in' planning the role for the artillery .
In the advance the artillery renders immediate support
to the infantry when contact with the enemy is gained .
This is accomplished by the artillery observers, who
accompany the foremost infantry elements, or observe
from balloon or airplane . In the attack the artillery must
neutralize the hostile resistance and open the way for the
advance of the infantry . Rapid reconnaissance and
prompt deployment for action contribute to the success
of this mission . It is generally advantageous for the
infantry to wait for the support of the artillery . It is
also important for the infantry to understand the limitations
and capabilities of the artillery ."
34 In this connection : (1) the number, caliber, and effective range of batteries
available ; (2) the time necessary for preparation of fire ; (3) the amount
and kind of ammunition available ; (4) the type of targets adapted to artillery
fire .
I
APPENDIX. SAMPLE GERMAN ORDERS
Examples of four different German orders arc given
below in English translation .' Though slightly awkward
in expression, the literal rendering tends to give tl}c. .r1010111
a more accurate conception, both as to contents and as to
structure . The English text is, however, notch longer
than the original German, partly because several English
words are sometimes needed to carry the thought expressed
in a single German word and partly because most
of the German military abbreviations have been translated
in full .
1 . EXAMPLE A
WARNING ORDER ( ORPS)
I ARMY ORPS
GUT EIMARSHAUSEN
OPERATIONS SE TION No .-
12 .4„ 1915 2
WARNING ORDER
1 . Our rear guards withdrew before weal: enemy
attacks. A long hostile column was observed marching
east on the road : BUREN-WINNENBERG-FUR3STENBERG
(head of column here by 1700) .
2 . I Army orps continues to retire on ASSEL on 13 .4.,
marching to position behind the FULDA RIVER, where
it will establish a defensive position,
I Examples of German combat orders in the German language are III tided
in "The German Rifle ompany For Studv and Translation ." ln(awontm
Bulletin, No. 15, May 16, 1942, pp . 295-307 .
2 This is the date and hour of the order . namely April 12 . at 1915 (7 .15
p . m.) . Dates and time are similarly indicated throughout this find the
other orders presented here .
77
78
GESIMAN TA TI AL OO TRInn'E
3. The 2d and 3d Inf Divs will march upon ASSEL
at 0400, with the heads of their main bodies crossing the
line: VOLKMARSEN-WOLF HAGEN-IPPINGHAUSEN
and the northernmost column of the 2d Inf, Div .
over EHRINGEN - OBERELSUNGEN - DURNBERG
.
The rear guards evacuate their present positions at
0300 and withdraw to the line : VOLKMARSEN-WOLFHAGEN-
NAUMBERG . This line will be held at least
until 13 .4, 1400 .
4. The 1st Inf Div withdraws upon HANN MUNDEN.
It will cover the wing and flank of the I orps
Boundary between 1st and 2d Divs : BILLENGSHAUSEN
- RHODEN - BREUNA - EHRSTEN -
SPEELE - WEDEMUNDEN (all to 1st Div) .
5 . orps ommander goes at 0300 to DURNBERG, in
the course of the morning to ES HERODA. Reports
to DURNBERG after 0500 .
Sent by Officer
x
in passenger car.
Lt General
2 . EXAMPLE B
OMPLETE OMBAT ORDER ( ORPS)
III ARMY ORPS
ORPS HEADQUARTERS
GENERAL STAFF SE TIONFRIEDRI
HRODA
Operations No . 3
21 .4 ., 1900
ORPS ORDER FOR THE ATTA K ON 24 .4
1 . In the hostile positions along the orps front there
have been no essential changes noted and enemy will continue
to defend his position . Improvement of fieldworks
continues . Aerial photographs of the front taken on the
AYTN N1 )IX
70
morning 20.4, wi11 be distributed today to all units down
to include battalions . In the sector ( OR 1% A R GI ; LA
ALTGURNA along the UMSTRUTrl' RI \'h;R, pork on
a rearward defensive position has been noted .
2. The I A? nyy orps attacks at X hour o n 24 .4 . In its
present combat zone and destroys the hostile force south
of the UMSTRI TT . Strong forces will follow the ('orbs
in the 2d line available to exploit a break-through .
Attack Objective of the orps on. 24 .4 .
High ground northeast and north of AS HARA-11'I1;-
GLEBEN-STEIN 13--north edge GR HARTH .
3 . Reconnaissance .-a . Reconnaissance Echelon (H) 3
(Air) reconnoiter the orps ombat Zone to include the
UMSTRUTT RIVER during 22 .4 and 23 .4 . Observe
particularly for special hostile arrangements Of dispositions
. On 23 .4 especially reconnoiter to locate hostile
reserves, tank barriers, tank defense wwweapon,s, a and tank
units.
From daybreak 24 .4 on are attached to :
7th Division 1 Airplane
8th Division 3 Airplanes
Planes available and prepared to fl y iuissions beginning
24 .4 ., 0430, from landing field URIEDRI('HHOI)A .
Drop and pick-up field maintained until 24 .4 ., 0430,
follows :
by 7 Div at, ALS B
by 8 Div southwest HAIN 13
b. Battle reconnaissance by the divisions : through
continual surveillance of the battlefield day and night,
from 22 .4 until 24.4, establish the location of changes
involving hostile observation posts, antitank defense,
MLR, artillery positions, road blocks and barriers,
80 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
reserves . For reasons of deception the activity of patrols
will not be increased .
4 . Organization and ombat Zones for the Attack :
Right: 9th Div
Middle : 7th Div
Attached:
orps Arty Btry 39
Hv Arty Btry 35 (only until 24 .4, X+2
hours)
Left : 8th Div
Attached :
Tk Brig 12
Army Arty Regt 101
Smoke Bn 102
Boundaries
between 9th and 7th Divs : east edge RO HHEIM
west edge AS HARA-east edge
E KARTSLEBEN-east edge ILLEBEN-
275 .
between 7th and 8th Divs : east edge BRUHEIM-
west edge GRUMBA H (STEIN B
to 7th Div)-west edge UFHOVEN-west
edge THAMSBRU K.
between 8th Div and I Army orps : east edge
GROSSENBEHRINGEN-west slope 367-
west part of GR . HARTH--west edge
ALTERSTEDT--east edge GROSSENGOTTERN,
5. onduct of Attack.-a. General.
'After an artillery preparation of 45 minutes, which will
cover the approach of the infantry to the line : NESSEBIEBER,
the infantry along the entire orps front will
APPENDIX SI
attack, crossing over the NESSE-BIEBER line at N
hour. Simultaneously in the 8th Div combat Zone t1w
landing waves of the Tank Brigade will cross the siunr
line .
As 1st Attack Objective, the orps and the neighboring
divisions of the I and II orps, will win the line : 33i
(northeast from MOLS HLEBEN)-ES HENBERGI';N
-292 (north from HAUSEN)-309 (northeast front
WESTHAUSEN)-north edge of WANGENHEIII-
278 (west from WANGENHEIM)-LOH B TUN GlEDAER
HEIGHTS-LEI H B-edge of wood northwest
GROSSEN-BEHRINGEN-W'ARTEN B .
The Tank Brigade will drive its attack through to
include the hostile artillery positions in the area : TUN -
GEDA- REI HENBA H- OSTERBEHRUN GEN--
LOH B . ontinuation of the attack after reaching 1st
Objective only upon order of the orps.
b. oordination of Time .
X-45 until X-40 minutes : Surprise fire by all artillery
to disturb hostile communications, reserves, and headquarters.
Infantry and Tank Brigade begin to move
into attack positions .
X-40 until X-20 minutes : (ounterbatterv lire hv oil
artillery.
X-20 until X hour : Artillery fire upon hostile forward
defensive positions . Smoking of B-STELLEN .3 The
3d Div will smoke particularly the forest edge north of
GROSSBEHRINGEN.
X hour
Infantry and initial waves of Tank Brigade cross the line :
NESSE----BIEBER, B . Transfer of artillery fire to the
Observation posts .
82 GERMAN TA TI AL DO TRINE
hostile artillery positions rearward corresponding to the
advance of the infantry attack . Simultaneously a box
barrage around the point of penetration fired by the
artillery of the I and II orps .
Early advance of positions of the mass of the light
artillery to Hill 309 (9th Div)- -278 (7th Div)--LOH BTHVNGEDAER-
LOR H B (8th Div) will be arranged
and carried out. -
The Tank Brigade will, after reaching the 1st Objective
and capturing the hostile artillery south of GR HARTU,
assemble in the area BRVHEIM-FRIEDRI HWERTH
awaiting further orders of the orps ommander,
6. The orps Artillery beginning with the artillery
preparation will maintain fire, by the 150-mm artillery,
upon the road : GRAFENTONNA-LANGESALZAGROSSENGOTTERN.
7. orps Antiaircraft Artillery--Part of Army AA . Art
Regt 104 and Army Pursuit Squadron . protect the preparation
for the attack--defend the assembly areas from hostile
air observation and air attack . Special protection of the
tank assembly ordered in paragraph 5b will be provided .
8. orps Reserves .
29th Inf
orps AT Bn
orps Engr Bn
The 29th Inf will reconnoiter for covered approaches to
and possible assembly areas in the area : FROTTSTEDT.
9. The Divisions will utilize to the fullest extent cover
and camouflage in preparation for the attack .
Divisions will submit their attack and fire plans to the
orps ommander not later than 23 .4, 1200 .
X hour will be announced at 23 .4, 2300 .
10 . The orps orrainouid Post will remain at FRIh 1)-
RI HRODA until 24 .4 (X- 30 wlien it, will be
lished at HAIN B) .
Distribution
B
"A"
APPEx DI%
3 . EXAMPLE
SEPARATE ORDER (ARMY)
ARMY OMMANDER
ARMY HQ
GENERAL STAFF SE TION I ALTENBURG, 1.12 ., 1500
NUMBER -
To RES INr REGT 19
1 . Res Inf Regt 19 (with 1st Bn Res Arty Regt 7, 1st
o Res Engr Bn 7 attached) is attached to the X Ann v
orps (Hq at WITT HENDORF) . It is expected that
Res Inf Regt 19 will be employed on the ~vest flank of the
X Army orps in the vicinity of S HLEITZ .
2. Reinfd Res Inf Regt 19 will be transported in trucks
(Trk Bn II) via S HIiOLEN-EISENBERG-HERMSDORF
to AUMA. March to begin from HAUMBUR(G
not later than 2 .12 ., 0000.
The ommander of the Truck Battalion II will report
at 1630 in NAUMBURG to the ommander of the 11e,,
Inf Regt 19. The loading of troops into trucks in the
bivouac area is not possible before 2200 .
After the troops are unloaded in the new ur ~t, tlW 'l'rk
13n 11 will march irmnediately to ZETZ .
3 . The ommander of Res Inf Regt 19 will report at the
OURT HOUSE in AUMA at 1 .1.2 ., 0200, where lie gill
receive further orders through the ommander of the
orps .
(by Radio)
For the ommander-in- hief
General of Infantry
Sri
84
GERMAN TA TI AL lO 'I'It1\E
4 . EXAMPLE D
SPE IAL INSTRU TIONS (DIVISION ADMINISTRATIVE
ORDER)
1ST DIVISION
DIVISION OMMAND POST
GENERAL STAFF SE TION FRIEDENSTADT 8 .10 .,1930
IB
NUMBER -
SPE IAL INSTRU TIONS FOR SUPPLY
(to Division Order Number- General Staff Section Ia,
8.10 ., 1930)
1 . Ammunition.-The supply of ammunition for the
rear guards will be provided from the balances now in
hands of troops and from the additional amounts to be
delivered not later than 2200 to each regiment as follows :
75,000 rifle cartridges
1,000 hand grenades
130 flares
60 signal light cartridges
680 light infantry mortar shells
330 37-mm shells
The supply of ammunition for the artillery will be handled
by the existing supply installations . Supply of ammunition
for the Division Reconnaissance Battalion will be
handled by 1st Infantry Regiment .
As reserve for the rear guards, ammunition will be left
back in the present ammunition distributing point under
guard, as follows :
100,000 armor-piercing cartridges
200 light infantry mortar shells
APPENDIX
j
300 37-min shells
600 105-mm light howitzer shells
The commander of the rear guard is responsible for the
proper distribution of this reserve ammunition .
Place and time for issue of ammunition to the troops
marching to the rear will be indicated later .
2. Rations .— Rations and reduced iron rations for the
rear guards will be left behind under guard as follow :
For rear guards in east sector : IN I R~I :1 ;13I?\
(.',HUR H,
For remaining rear guards : (~ROS,~RIs'1'1BA('II
HUR H.
These rations will be collected by the rear-guard troops
on 9 .10 ., 0400.
Rations for remaining troops for 9 .10, will be delivered
to the bivouacs of March Groups A, B, and , by means
of supply column (animal-drawn) before 9 .10 ., 0000 .
These supply columns will then remain with the march
groups .
3 . Medical Service (Wen) .
ollecting point (severely wounded) at FI111 ;I)h;NSTADT
.
ollecting point (lightly wounded) at (,AJhTADT .
These collecting stations will be closed at 2100 . The
Med o and Mtr Anlb Plat (less section remaining witli
rear guard) will march to GRAFENRODA via KLEII\IRETTBA
FI--BITTSTADT--GRAWIN1Kl L .
ollecting point for wounded will be established in
GOSSEL to open not later than 9 .10 ., 0700 .
The F Hosp will remain in ARNSTADT until 9 .10.,
0400, and will then be marched to SUHL . Wounded
17
The German Armored Division (Extract), 1942
additional distribution is being made to the armored forces, tank destroyer
battalions, and antitank units .
3. Each command should circulate available copies among its officers .
Reproduction within the military service is permitted provided (1) the source
is stated, (2) the classificatiori :is not changed, and (3) the information is
safeguarded . Attention is invited to paragraph 10a, AR 380-3 which is
quoted in part as follows : "A docdment . . . will be classified and . . .
marked restricted when information contained therein is for official use
only, or when its disclosure should - be . . . denied the general public ."
4. Suggestions for future bull 4ins are invited . Any correspondence
relating to Information Bulletins may be addressed directly to the Dissemination
Branch, Military Intelligence Service, War Department, Washington, D . .
Foreword
This bulletin is a translation of a captured German training
manual on The German Armored Division, which was published
in December 1940 . At that time the number of German
armored divisions was being increased and their organization
changed . omments by German commanders in Libya as late as
October 1941 indicate, however, that the principles expressed in
this manual have proved satisfactory with little or no modification.
The charts that follow have been added to the original German
manuscript . They have been compiled from G-2 sources .
Military Intell i gence Service
War Department
Washington, June 15, 1942
Information Bulletin
No. 18
MIS
NOTI E
1 . Information Bulletins, which have replaced Tentative Lessons Bulletins,
have a dual purpose : (1) To provide all officers with reasonably confirmed
information from official and other reliable sources, and (2) to serve as material
for lectures to troops .
2 . Nondivisional units are being supplied with copies on a basis similar to
the approved distribution for divisional commands, as follows :
Inf. Div . av . Div . Armd. Div .
Div. Hq .---- 8 Div . Hq 4 Div. Hq 11
Rcn . Troop 1 Ord. c 1 Rcn. Bn 1
Sig . o 1 Sig . Troop 1 Engr. Bn I
Engr. Bn 1 Rcn. Sq 1 Med. Bn 1
Med . Bn---- . 1 Engr. Sq 1 Maint. Bn-- .. 1
QM Bn 1 Med. Sq 1 Supply Bn-- . 1
!.4 Hq. Inf. Regt ., 1 ea- 3 QM Sq I biv. Train Hq 1
Inf . Bn ., 1 ea . 9 Hq. av. Brig ., 2 ea- 4 Armd. Regt ., 4 ea--- 8
Hq . Div . Arty 1 av. Regt ., 4 ea---- 16 FA Bn., 1 ea 3
FA Bn ., 1 ea 4 Hq. Div . Arty 1 Inf . Regt . _--
FA Bn., 1'ea 3
30 32
34
Distribution to air units is being made by the A-2 of Army Air Forces . An
TABLE OF ONTENTS
IV
11
t t
11
' '
TANK HUNTER
$)
47•mm antitank gun
1
mounted in chassis
of Mark I tank
MARK II TANK
Length: 15 ft, 4 in .
Width: 7 ft . 2 in .
Height: 6 ft. 5 in .
Height: 5 ft . 7 in .
%via
GERMAN TANKS
1 1
OhanbyJaeplRNaee •Draflin9Serlios-1. 0.02JY4
MARK I TANS
Length: 12 ft . 6 in .
Width: 8 ft .
ASSAULT GUN
75-mm gun mounted in
chassis of Mark III
tank
MARK III TANK
Length: 17 ft . 8 in .
Width: 9 ft . 9 in,
Height: 7 ft . 9 in .
MARK IV TANK
Length: 19 ft . 2 in .
Width: 9 ft . 5 in .
Height: 8 ft . 7 in .
Af7l) -eo/n
Paragraphs Page
hapter 1 . haracteristics and organization 1-5 1
hapter 2 . Role of the armored division 6-12 2
hapter 3 . Employment of the armored division 13-23 4
hapter 4 . omponents of the armored division 24-55 9
Section I . Tank brigade 24-31 9
II . Motorized infantry brigade 32-37 10
III . Artillery regiment 38-40 11
IV. Antitank battalion 41-44 12
V. Armored engineer battalion 45-48 13
VI . Armored signal battalion 49-52 14
VII. Light antiaircraft battalion 5 .3-55 15
hapter S . Reconnaissance 56-74 16
Section I . General 56-57 16
II, Air reconnaissance 58-64 16
III . Motorized reconnaissance battalion 55-68 17
IV. Unit combat reconnaissance 69-71 18
V. ooperation between air and ground reconnaissance
72-74 19
hapter 6 . Movement 75-98 20
Section I . General 75-84 20
II . March organization 35-91 22
III . Security on the move 92-98 24
hapter 7 . Deployment 99-102 2
hapter 8 . Attack 1 3-143 27
Section I . General 103-107 27
II, onduct of the attack 108-126 28
III . Attack from an assembly position 127-143 33
hapter 9 . Pursuit 144-149 37
hapter 10. Defense 150 150 38
p action
1 151-154 39
hapter 12 .' Special conditions
-
155-165 40
Section'1 • Attack against a permanently fortified position-_
., 153-156 40
II . Attack' across.a riv€r 157-159 41
III . Fighting in built-up areas 160 42
IV. Fighting in woods and mountains 161 42
V. Fighting in smoke and fog 162-165 43
hapter 13 ; Rest 166-168 44
hapter 14 . Services 159-183 45
ARMORED DIVISION (STANDARD)
DIV 110
Tk Regt
Mtz FA
Mt . Rifle
Regt
Brig
Mtz Rcn Tk ~
Tk
Tk
Worki shop
Lt
Lt
M
Survey Mtrcl
RiRe
Rile Sig At Engr
En
Bn
En
Bn
o
Bn
Bn
Bn
Btry
Bn
Regt
Regt Bn Bn Bn
Woraknsdhop
Plat
NOTE.-When engaged in operations, an armored division may have some of the following attached : assault artillery battalion, antitank
battalion with self-propelled mounts, motorized antiaircraft battalion, mixed antiaircraft battery . It should be borne in mind that the organization
of the armored division is very flexible, and is changed in accord with materiel available, the terrain, and the equipment of the enemy .
Tk egt
Mtz Rifle
Regt
ARMORED DIVISION (LIBYAN)
DIV HQ
Arty
Regt
Services
I
I
I
I
I
I Mtz Rcn
Tk
Tk
Rifle
Rifle
Mtcl AT AA
Arty
Arty Engr Sig
Bn
Bn
Bn
Bn
Bn
Bn Bn Bn
Bn
But Bn But
-1 Supply o
3 Workshop os
-Ration Supply
-Med Unit
MP and Postal
Services
-M 3 os
-M T 1 o
-Truck Tr
14 lms
-Repair Shop
3 os
-Supplies
3 Sec
-M P &
Postal
U
x
3
-a
:
-a
L
0U
a
x
U1nN
F
0U
0U
a
4. N
a0
Ua ¢S
x
Fy
V
VIII
aF
Mk
m
a N
xro
p U
a. W
U)
a+ F
v N
THE GERMAN ARMORED DIVISION
1 . The armored division is intended for strategic roles . It
combines great fire power with high mobility, and its armor and
speed restrict the effectiveness of enemy weapons .
2 . Its strength lies in attack . It is especially suited for surprise
appearances on the battlefield, rapid concentration of considerable
fighting power, obtaining quick decisions by break-throughs, deep
penetrations on wide fronts, and the destruction of the enemy .
The attack of the armored division has a serious effect on the
enemy's morale.
3. The nature of the terrain is a decisive factor for successful
employment of the armored division . Full use of its speed can be
insured by choice of good roads with bridges of adequate capacity,
and by their being kept clear of other troops . Speed across
country depends upon weather, formation of the ground, nature
of the soil, and density of vegetation . It is slower than on roads .
The full striking power of the armored division can best be developed
in attack over rolling country with few features . Marshy,
wooded, and rough country allows movement off the road only for
short stretches, with reduced mobility. It may exclude the
employment of tanks .
4. The components of an armored division are so proportioned
that the detachment of individual units, especially of tanks, or
their attachment to other units, restricts the fitness of the division
for employment in strategic roles .
5 . The main striking force of the division lies in its tank brigade .
Its offensive infantry element is the motorized infantry brigade .
In addition the armored division comprises motorized reconnaissance
elements, motorized artillery, antitank units, armored
signal units, antiaircraft machine-gun troops, and supply and
maintenance services . In active campaigns an observation squadron
(serves also for artillery observation) and a light antiaircraft
battalion are attached to the division .
• d
•
• w
a
485655°-42--2
1
>
0U
06 hapter 1
0
0U
-a brxo
w HARA TERISTI S AND ORGANIZATION
hapter 2
ROLE OF THE ARMORED DIVISION
6 . The armored division normally fights in the framework of
the armored corps, but is also suited to carry out independent
operations, in which case reinforcement with motorized infantry
and artillery is usually necessary .
7. Its supreme role is to obtain decision in battle . Within the
framework of the armored corps it can carry out the following
tasks :
a . Break through an enemy protective screen to make early
contact with the enemy's main force ;
b. Obtain early possession of topographical features and sectors
of decisive importance for further fighting ;
c. Gain surprise in an attack on the advancing enemy to frustrate
his plans and take the initiative from him ;
d. Attack an enemy incompletely prepared for defense ;
e. Attack on a narrow front against a prepared enemy ;
f. Restore momentum to an attack which has come to a standstill;
g . Break through on a wide front against a demoralized enemy ;
h. Exploit success and complete the destruction of the enemy
by deep penetration or flank attack ;
i. Pursue a defeated enemy ;
j. arry out strategic envelopment ;
k. Attack to destroy enemy tank units ;
1. ooperate with parachute and air-borne troops .
8. The armored division acting independently can carry out
the following strategic tasks :
a. Reconnaissance in force in cooperation with strategic aerial
reconnaissance ;
b. Early occupation of sectors important for further operations,
of politically and economically important localities, and of industrial
installations ;
2
c. Delaying the enemy advance, providing a protective screen,
or acting as a flank guard to a larger unit,
9. The armored division is equally suitable for breaking through
a prepared position when the position is strengthened by isolated
permanent fortifications . The cooperation of medium artillery
and bombardment aviation then becomes necessary .
In an attack on a prepared position, the speed and mobility of
an armored division cannot be exploited . There is a danger that
tanks may he exposed to such heavy casualties against a prepared
defense that the further employment of the division becomes impossible.
Armored divisions are therefore only to be used for breaking
through a permanent front if infantry divisions are not available,
if the delay in bringing them forward may result in losing an
opportunity to exploit the success with armored divisions well
forward, or if the enemy is already demoralized . The armored
division must then be reinforced by motorized infantry, artillery,
and motorized engineers, weapons capable of assaulting concrete
works, and smoke troops . They must also be supported by
bombardment aviation.
10 . The armored division can attack across a river . The necessary
amount of reinforcement by other arms, especially engineers,
depends on the strength of the enemy and his defense, and on the
width of the river .
11 . The role of the armored division in a protective task is
generally offensive . It carries out counterattacks to relieve parts
of the front under heavy pressure, breaks up enemy tank attacks
by surprise thrusts, is employed against the flanks of an enemy
who has broken through, or attacks the enemy from the flanks or
rear while he is held frontally .
If the armored division has to take part in a defensive operation,
which will be exceptional, every effort must be made to relieve it
as quickly as possible by infantry units .
12 . The armored division can also be used independently to
screen the withdrawal of large units . This task is usually carried
out offensively .
3
hapter 3
EMPLOYMENT OF THE ARMORED DIVISION
13 . The speed and mobility of the armored division demand
of all commanders boldness, powers of rapid decision, and ability
to convert decisions into brief commands .
14. The strength of the armored division lies in concentrating
the force of the tank brigade. This is the normal practice . It
is the task of the commander to see that all arms of the division
are used to support the tank attack . Individual arms must be
mutually supporting, and each must be prepared to exploit the
success of the other .
15. Task forces can be formed temporarily for specific missions :
a . In the attack, when the division is advancing on a broad
front over several roads against a weaker enemy, or in traversing
wooded or mountainous country ;
b . In a rapid pursuit when the division has to anticipate the
enemy in occupying important points, road junctions, potential
bottlenecks, etc. ;
c. In a withdrawal, to cover disengagement from the enemy .
Task forces are employed in accordance with the same principles
that apply to the armored division as a whole . The division
commander can influence the battle by employing reserves of all
arms. Task forces, however, must be provided at the outset
with all means necessary for the task allotted . The division
commander must make every effort to reconcentrate all parts of
the division under his direct command .
16. The object of the armored division in battle is'destruction
of the enemy, either by break-through or envelopment . The
mobility of the armored division enables it to avoid a frontal
engagement and to maneuver to the enemy's rear .
Foresight in choice of the terrain over which an anticipated
engagement is to take place is of great importance . This terrain
should be thoroughly covered by air reconnaissance . The art of
4
command lies in ability to choose the exact moment for deployment
for battle so that the object may be achieved wwith maximum
speed and minimum losses .
The armored division must be deployed in depth . When deep
penetration is made, long flanks are frequently exposed . Anxiety
on this cause must not, however, be allowed to hamper bold
action nor divert the division from the decisive direction . Advance
measures must be taken to screen the flanks and defend against
air attack.
17. In battle the full striking force of the division must be
used unsparingly . The more decisive the role of the division in
the operation, the more important this becomes . The greater the
forces that can be concentrated at one point, the greater will be
the success and the smaller the losses .
18. The tank's ability to surprise by its speed and mobility
must be fully exploited . Aids to this are the screening of movements,
camouflage of bivouacs, and prevention of enemy air
reconnaissance .
19. Accurate knowledge of the topography must be obtained
by detailed study of maps and aerial photographs before orders
are issued .
Subordinate commanders must be kept constantly informed
of the current situation and the division commander's ultimate
intention, in order to be able to adjust themselves to rapid changes
in the situation which are often encountered as a result of the
speed of movement, and in order to act in accord with the commander's
general plan when unexpected difficulties and obstacles
are encountered .
The cooperation of all parts of the division must be worked
out in the greatest detail possible by the division commander.
In order to avoid' delays, frequent use will be made in the armored
division of short warning orders . A thrust line (see note) will
be given to the division during the attack in order that fresh
directions of attack and objectives may be radioed in the clear .
Important information gained by reconnaissance can also be communicated
quickly and safely by this means .
Note . The thrust line (Stosslinie) method is much used by the Germans
for sending map references in the clear . It consists of a line drawn upon a
5
The situation and necessity for rapid action may compel the
division commander to intervene temporarily in the command of
lower units by setting new objectives for the tanks or the motorized
infantry regiments .
20. ommanders of all units must establish themselves with
an advance headquarters well forward, and must be in a position
to survey the battlefield frequently in time to issue their orders
map which theoretically may run in any direction but actually usually
extends in the proposed direction of advance or down the axis of a reconnaissance
unit .
6
Tl'e line, which begins at a fixed point and continues indefinitely in the
required direction, is usually divided into centimeters for convenience . To
give a map reference a perpendicular is dropped from the reference point to
the thrust line . Measurements are then taken from the point of origin to
the point where the perpendicular cuts the thrust line, then along the perpendicular
to the reference point . Since the point may lie on either side of
the thrust line, the second figure must be prefaced by either " right" or 'left"
or as one looks toward the enemy .
A typical reference would be "6 right 3 ." The figures are always in centimeters
; therefore the actual distance on the ground will vary with the scale
of the map used . The scale may start with an arbitrary figure, have dummy
figures interspersed, or start with the number of the thrust line when there are
several in a given area . These devices make the code difficult to break
rapidly .
Instruments have been found consisting of a transparent ruler graduated
in millimeters, with a shorter ruler similarly graduated fixed to slide up and
down at right angles to the long ruler . Operators with practice can give
references very quickly .
early and note changes in the situation,' This applies especially
to the division commander .' On the move he will usually have
his headquarters with the commander of the advance guard . In
action he will choose a position from which he can most quickly
and directly influence the conduct of the battle .
A tactical headquarters group will remain as long as possible
with the division commander . Terrain, enemy activity, liaison
with superior headquarters, and necessity for insuring unified
command may, however, lead to separation . Even so, the
tactical group must make every effort to be well forward . The
division commander communicates with his tactical group by radio
or messenger . He must keep constantly in touch with his tactical
group in order to keep abreast of the situation as a whole .
It may be desirable to specify in division orders the route to be
followed by the tactical group and the proposed location of the
command post. Higher headquarters and units protecting flanks
must have early notice of these points .
It must be made clear in orders which units are to establish
message-dropping grounds .
21 . Signal communications must be established early so that
information and orders may be transmitted quickly to meet
changes in the situation . As the radio method of communication
employed by the armored division betrays the latter's presence to
the enemy, radio silence must be maintained, especially by tank
units, until the moment operations commence . Orders must
therefore be communicated as long as possible by means of
messengers, telephones, and, over long distances, by aircraft .
See par . 140, FM 100-5, FSR .
s In this connection, note the following excerpt from "Panzers across the
Meuse," in The Field Artillery journal (April 1941) ;
"Of interest is General Guderian's method of exercising command in the
field . His headquarters is divided into two echelons . The rear one (headed
by the hief of Staff) contains the larger part of the staff, and remains in
fairly quiet places to study situation maps, work on orders, and to act as a
clearing house for the flow of information to and from the front . The
forward echelon of headquarters is led by the general himself (he is the 'outside'
man) in a small cross-country car . Apparently Guderian sits in the
front seat of this vehicle, which he frequently drives himself . With him are
two staff' officers and an adjutant . Following are two aides in motorcycles
with side cars ; then two or three messengers on solo motorcycles ; and finally
the armored wireless truck, or P-an open armored vehicle equipped with
radios, map tables, etc . Guderian used this car throughout the Polish carnpaign.
With this small circus he spends his time up at the very front,
circulating back and forth between his subordinate units ."
7
After battle begins, orders are issued chiefly,by radio . It is
essential to proper functioning of the armored division that radio
communication should function perfectly, since it controls not
only communications within the division, but also between the
division and neighboring formations, and between air and ground
reconnaissance forces .
Radio must be safeguarded . All messages regarding future
intentions which allow the enemy sufficient time to take countermeasures
must be camouflaged in accordance with regulations .
Messages and orders which call for immediate action are sufficiently
camouflaged by use of the thrust line and code names .
22. If there is likelihood of cooperation of fighter and bombardment
aviation with the armored division, contact must be made
beforehand with commanders of the units involved, and details
thoroughly worked out .
An air liaison officer must be allotted to headquarters of an
armored division. He must have an air signal section to maintain
constant touch with flying units. Timing and targets must be
worked out in advance in cooperation with dive-bomber and
bomber units . ommanders of air units must have early information
of the movement of the armored division . Targets must
be clearly laid down in order of priority .
Those elements of the division which are to receive aerial support
in the attack must know the objectives to be attacked and
the time, number, and duration of attacks to be made .
23. ooperation of the armored division with parachute and
air-borne troops must be coordinated as regards time and plans .
Each must know the task of the other . The armored division
must endeavor to establish contact with air-borne troops by swift
attack . Radio communication must be established between the
armored division and commanders of the parachute or air-borne
troops .
8
hapter 4
OMPONENTS OF THE ARMORED DIVISION
Section I
TANK BRIGADE
24 . Because of its large number of guns and machine guns of
various calibers, its speed of going into action and its maneuverability,
the tank brigade can concentrate a heavy volume of fire on
all targets . Its cross-country performance and armor enable it
to exploit this fire power against the enemy at most effective
ranges .
25 . The success of the tank brigade depends upon its employment
in mass formation and the concentration of the largest possible
number of tanks to gain surprise in deep thrusts against the
enemy's weak spots.
26 . In all situations the success of the tank brigade is primarily
dependent upon the personal leadership of the commander .
27. He carries out the reconnaissance of ground on which the
conduct of the tank battle depends . On the basis of the division
order, his knowledge of the terrain, and reconnaissance, he lays
down the detailed order of battle for his brigade, its main line of
attack, and its frontage and depth .
The tank brigade can be employed either in frontal or flank
attack, and in several waves . The method depends upon the
task, the terrain, the degree of resistance expected from the
enemy, and the depth of the enemy's defensive zone . In general,
flank attack is preferred .
When the situation is uncertain or the attack made over dead
ground, it may be desirable to employ at first only a few elements,
holding the remainder of the force in close reserve . The first
wave of tanks must be given sufficient tanks with heavy caliber
guns to insure that the enemy's antitank defense is quickly and
surely neutralized .
465680°-42---3
28. On the basis of division orders, the brigade commander
lays down the method of cooperation between tank regiments and
supporting arms . During the battle he gives orders either
verbally or by radio to the artillery regimental or battery commanc:
er accompanying him,
29. During the attack the brigade commander keeps the division
constantly informed of the progress of the attack and of the objectives
gained . On reaching objectives he decides whether the
regiments are to be organized to pursue the attack or to reassemble
under division orders .
30. During the attack the brigade commander directs his
unit by means of radio . He has for this purpose the brigade
signal platoon, which is detached from the division armored
signal battalion . The nature of the task, the situation, and the
allotment of other arms will from time to time necessitate change
in the use of radio communications . Normally, the brigade
commander will maintain radio contact with the division, his
regiments, and the artillery. It may also be necessary, however,
to establish radio communications with the motorized infantry
and air force reconnaissance units, as well as with antitank troops .
The brigade commander must make an early decision as to what
communications are absolutely essential and whether an additional
allotment is required from the division .
Radio communications from reconnaissance aviation working
with the tanks may, if necessary, be supplemented by message
dropping .
31 . If task forces are formed, the commander of the tank
brigade will normally command one of them .
Section II
MOTORIZED INFANTRY BRIGADE
32. The main effort of the armored division falls upon the
motorized infantry brigade when the nature of the ground and
tank obstacles prevent use of the tank brigade, and when it is
essential to exploit the speed of the motorized infantry .
33. Equipment of the motorized infantry brigade with armored
transport vehicles enables it to follow the tank brigade in vehicles
over the battlefield, and to fight in close cooperation with the
tanks .
10
The motorized infantry fights on foot, It can, however, engage
an inferior or demoralized enemy without dismounting .
These two methods supplement each other . Transport vehicle
crews must therefore be kept close at hand while the infantry is
fighting dismounted . In those cases where the motorized infantry
brigade is not equipped with armored transport vehicles, it must
dismount as soon as it comes within range of enemy infantry fire,
The motorized infantry brigade moves more quickly than the
tank brigade on roads and tracks .
34 . Equipment of the motorized infantry brigade with a large
number of automatic weapons enables it to hold a broad front,
even against an enemy of considerable strength .
35 . The motorcycle battalion is an especially rapid and adaptable
force . It is particularly fitted to anticipate the enemy in
rapidly occupying important areas, to engage a weak enemy, to
follow closely behind a tank attack, especially at night, in order
to provide the tank brigade with necessary infantry protection,
to reinforce the reconnaissance unit, to undertake wide and deep
enveloping movements, to perform protective roles, and to act as
a reserve.
36. The motorized infantry brigade has a signal platoon which
is detached from the division armored signal battalion . On the
move and when advancing deployed in vehicles, communications
will be chiefly by radio . When attacking deployed on foot, wire
communication becomes necessary .
37. If task forces are formed, the commander of the motorized
infantry brigade will normally command one of them .
Section III
ARTILLERY REGIMENT
38. In keeping with the mobility of the armored division, the
artillery must be employed in a mobile and elastic manner . Its
equipment and speed in going into action enable it to give continued
and effective support to the swiftly moving attack of the
division. Its armor and its mobility on self-propelled mounts
permit part of the artillery to follow the tanks, even within range
of enemy infantry weapons, and to go into action from positions
where fire by direct laying is possible . Armored command and
11
observation vehicles enable the officer observing and directing the
artillery fire to accompany the tank attack and to cooperate
closely with the commander of the tank brigade .
39, The relatively small size of the artillery component makes
it necessary that it be allotted only a few tasks of major importance
. Fire of the artillery must be strictly concentrated upon such
targets as cannot be engaged by the tanks .
In an attack against an enemy organized for defense, every
effort must be made to reinforce the division artillery, particularly
with medium batteries. Artillery reinforcements obtained from
the GHQ pool, by their equipment and training, are not so well
fitted for direct support of the tank attack as is the division
artillery . Their primary role should be to engage targets in the
enemy's rear and flanks after the first penetration has been made .
Smoke troops can give effective assistance to artillery .'
40. Artillery spotting planes and the armored observation battery
report enemy gun positions and provide the commander
with valuable supplementary information . They can undertake
tasks of registering and spotting for their own artillery .
Spotting posts of the armored observation battery lying outside
the division's sector must be given protection,
Section IV
ANTITANK BATTALION'
41 . As a result of its speed, mobility, cross-country performance,
and protection against tanks, the antitank battalion can attack
enemy tanks . It unites mobility and fire power in battle . Its
object is to engage and destroy enemy tanks by surprise attack
from an unexpected direction with concentrated fire .
1 Smoke troops are probably attached to the armored divisions only on
special missions . The smoke company is believed to consist of . about 120
officers and enlisted men and 24 vehicles . In addition each company has
eight 81-mm mortars, and it is possible that 100-mm mortars may be
introduced . 2 The antitank battalion comprises headquarters, signal section, three
antitank companies, and probably one antiaircraft company . An antitank
company consists of headquarters, signal section, and three platoons . Each
platoon consists of four sections each armed with one 37-mm AT gun, and
one section armed with two light machine guns. The 37-mm AT guns are
now being replaced in many units by 50-mm AT guns . The antiaircraft
company is believed to consist of twelve 20-mm superheavy AA and AT
machine guns .
1 2
42. In ,addition to engaging enemy tanks, the antitank unit has
the task of neutralizing enemy antitank defenses, thereby sup
porting its own tanks .
43 . Antitank units, especially when supporting motorized
infantry, can also use HE shell to neutralize especially troublesome
enemy defense areas . Heavy antitank units can engage
loopholes of permanent defenses and of fortified houses .
44 . Antitank units will normally be employed in companies .
In an attack against strong enemy tank forces, every endeavor
should be made to employ the battalion in a mass formation . In
engaging loopholes and enemy defense areas, antitank units will
be employed by platoons or with single guns .
Section V
ARMORED ENGINEER BATTALION'
45 . The armored engineer battalion is able to follow tanks
everywhere on the battlefield . In cases where not all the battalion
vehicles are armored or capable of moving across country,
only the armored engineer company of the battalion can be used
in direct support of the tank brigade .
46. The task of the armored engineers is to provide the armored
division on the march and in battle with the necessary facilities for
movement. These include :
a . Seeking out and removing obstacles in the line of advance ;
b . learing lanes through mine fields ;
c. Marking mined areas ;
d. onstructing crossings and bridges with improvised or
standard equipment capable of carrying all vehicles of the armored
division .
In addition, armored engineers cooperate especially in the attack
against permanent defenses .
,
s The armored engineer battalion consists of headquarters, 3 light motorized
companies (possibly only 2 in some cases), 1 motorized heavy bridge
column, and 1 supply park . The motorized companies have 4 officers and
183 enlisted men each, and are armed with 9 light machine guns, 153 rifles,
and 34 pistols . The heavy bridge column comprises all the equipment and
personnel necessary for construction of a bridge of 28-ton capacity . It has
6 officers, 184 enlisted men, and is armed with I light machine gun, 153 rifles,
and 36 pistols . The supply park has 2 officers and 48 enlisted men, and is
armed with 1 light machine gun, 36 rifles, and 14 pistols . The personnel and
engineer equipment is moved in passenger cars, trucks, tractor trailers, and
motorcycles.
13
I
47 . ThePaige number of engineer tasks necessitates economy of
employment . The engineer force must not split up into small
detachments . All other tasks must be subordinated to the main
function of insuring a clear passage for advance of the tank brigade ;
therefore every endeavor must be made to employ the armored
engineers before the tank attack begins .
48. The tank brigade, the motorized infantry brigade, and the
reconnaissance unit each has its own engineer platoon . The
nature of the task, the situation, and the terrain may in some cases
necessitate its reinforcement by parts of the armored engineer
battalion.
Section VI
ARMORED SIGNAL BATTALION 4
49. In keeping with the mobility of the armored division, the
armored signal battalion is well equipped with radio and telephone
equipment . ross-country armored signal vehicles can
accompany the tank attack wherever it goes and supply the communication
necessary for its command .
50 . The chief signal officer of the division must be kept informed
of the current situation, plans, and employment of troops in order
for him to make suitable arrangements for communications .
51 . Radio communications must be insured by employment of
sufficiently powerful sets in point-to-point traffic . In event of
a rapidly moving attack by the armored division, the chief signal
officer must have at his disposal a reserve of radio equipment .
52 . Telephone communications, especially to superior headquarters,
must be maintained as long as possible . It is important
to cooperate with the corps signal unit in pushing forward a main
artery as rapidly and as far as possible .
Existing civilian telephone lines are to be used when possible .
In rapidly moving operations over wide areas, the division commander
decides if and when wire communications are to be
established.
i The signal battalion of an armored division consists of headquarters, an
armored radio company, an armored signal company, and a light combat
train .
14
Section VII
LIGHT ANTIAIR RAFT BATTALION
53. The units of the armored division are vulnerable to attack
by enemy aircraft . It is normally not possible to give protection
to all parts of the armored division . If army antiaircraft units
and heavy air force antiaircraft units are attached to the division,
the employment of all antiaircraft fire power must be unified .
54. The scanty proportion of fire power forces the command
to limit tasks of the light antiaircraft battalion, and to concentrate
them at especially threatened localities .
55 . In cases where the antitank battalion does not possess
guns effective against tanks at longer ranges, heavy antiaircraft
units or single guns will be used in antitank defense and assault
of fixed defenses, according to the principles in paragraphs 42
to 44 .
15
hapter 5
RE ONNAISSAN E
Section I
GENERAL
56. The rapid movement of an armored division over wide
areas demands forethought in directing and executing reconnaissance
. Reconnaissance will be carried out by the air force reconnaissance
squadron (attached to the armored division) and the
motorized reconnaissance units, augmented by information collected
by the armored observation troop .
57 . Tasks given to the various reconnaissance units must
supplement each other . In view of the small allotment of reconnaissance
forces, supplementary tasks must be allotted for more
detailed reconnaissance in a decisive direction only . Aerial and
ground reconnaissance units must maintain close liaison .
Section II
AIR RE ONNAISSAN E
58. The armored division can obtain its information about the
enemy most rapidly from the air reconnaissance squadron .
59. This air reconnaissance squadron covers objectives 30
miles in front of the foremost parts of the division . At greater
distances the army reconnaissance squadron of the armored corps
is responsible. The limits of reconnaissance on the flanks are
determined by the presence or absence of one's own troops, and
the distances at which they are located .
60 . The air force commander with the armored corps can take
control of the armored division reconnaissance squadron, if
direction of reconnaissance by the armored corps becomes
necessary .
16
61 . In' tical reconnaissance the squadron can )employed
in the following special missions :
a . Watching railways and roads, especially for movements of
tanks, antitank and motorized forces ;
b . Reporting serious obstacles and barriers, and areas suitable
for defense against tanks ;
c . Reporting the nature of the terrain in the line of the division's
advance .
It is of special importance to determine whether there are
enemy forces concentrated to move against the flanks of the
division.
62 . Aerial photography must be planned in advance, as it provides
valuable data for employment of the division,
63 . In air reconnaissance during battle, watching over the
tank brigade is of special importance when the latter is operating
in advance of the other units of the division . Early confirmation
of the positions of enemy antitank guns, the concentration of
enemy tanks, tank obstacles, and ground suitable for tanks is
important. The objectives reached by one's own tanks also should
be reported .
64. Reconnaissance aircraft can give advance warning of
approaching enemy aircraft .
Section III
MOTORIZED RE ONNAISSAN E BATTALION'
65 . The division puts the motorized reconnaissance battalion
well in front when it needs to supplement air reconnaissance
I The motorized reconnaissance battalion of an armored division consists
of headquarters, a motorized signal corps platoon, 2 armored car companies,
1 motorcycle company, 1 heavy weapons company, and a light ammunition
column. The motorized reconnaissance battalion has 12 heavy armored
cars and 42 light armored cars and is armed with 63 light machine guns, 6
heavy machine guns, 12 20-mm machine guns, 3 37-mm antitank guns, 2
75-mm cavalry howitzers, 3 81-mm mortars, and 3 50-mm light mortars .
The armored car companies consist of 6 heavy armored cars and 21 light
and superlight armored cars, and their armament consists of 24 light machine
guns, 1 heavy machine gun, and 6 20-mm machine guns . The motorcycle
company has 8 solo motorcycles, 41 motorcycles with side cars, and 10 light
trucks, and is armed with 9 light machine guns, 4 heavy machine guns, and
3 50-mm light howitzers . The heavy weapons company has 6 light machine
guns, 3 37-nim antitank guns, 2 75-mm cavalry howitzers, and 3 81-mm
mortars .
465059'-4 2-4 17
quickly, when a clear picture of the enemy's dis ,;Jcions can
be obtained only by fighting. The reconnaissance battalion is
fitted for this because of its equipment with armored vehicles and
numerous automatic weapons . To carry out reconnaissance in
battle against a stronger enemy, it must be reinforced .
66 . The motorized reconnaissance battalion is fast, and has a
wide radius of action . It can be employed for distances up to
60 miles. The frontage on which reconnaissance is carried out
will generally be decided by the armored corps . In independent
employment of the division, conditioning factors are estimated
strength of the enemy, number of areas to be reconnoitered, road
conditions, and nature of the terrain . It may extend to 35 miles,
and frequently even more on open flanks .
67 . The abundance of reconnaissance tasks makes it necessary
for the command to concentrate on the essential . Apart from
tasks which any reconnaissance unit may be called upon to carry
out, the motorized battalion must also give early information of
enemy antitank defenses, and by reconnaissance of the terrain
prepare the way for movement of the armored division .
68 . As soon as battle begins, the motorized reconnaissance
battalion must receive orders as to whether it is to continue its
reconnaissance activity, hold temporarily important features,
withdraw through the division, clear the front, or carry out
reconnaissance on the flank. Because of the nature of its composition,
the motorized reconnaissance battalion is not suited for
defensive missions . For example, an open flank may be watched
over by long-range reconnaissance but must be protected by
other troops.
Section IV
UNIT OMBAT RE ONNAISSAN E
69. ombat reconnaissance must be initiated as soon as the
division is deployed . It is supplemented by reconnaissance
platoons of regiments, by the armored pbservation troop, and by
reconnaissance patrols on foot .
70. In combat reconnaissance, the location of enemy antitank
weapons by all arms of the armored division is of special
importance .
18
71 . In cases where the tank brigade and the motorized infantry
brigade are not equipped with tanks for battle reconnaissance,
motorcyclists, infantry in armored transport vehicles, and bicyclists
will carry out the reconnaissance.
Section V
OOPERATION BETWEEN AIR AND GROUND
RE ONNAISSAN E
72 . ooperation between air and ground methods of transmitting
reconnaissance reports must be laid down by the division .
Air reconnaissance will frequently show the motorized reconnaissance
unit the direction in which reconnaissance must be developed
. The motorized reconnaissance unit must have direct radio
communication with the reconnaissance aircraft . If this is not
possible, it will tune in to the reports of the reconnaissance plane .
73 . In order to screen radio traffic, the reconnaissance unit will,
as far as possible, communicate its reports to a station already
known to the enemy . The division will listen in to messages .
74. Reconnaissance pilots can report either by means of radio,
message dropping, or verbally on landing. The most rapid
means is by radio, or by message dropping during flight . Radio
communication is to be preferred as it offers the advantages of
allowing queries to be made from the ground and new tasks to be
communicated to the observer .
As far as radio equipment permits, units of the division should
listen to the air observer .
19
hapter 6
MOVEMENT
Section I
GENERAL
75 . On good roads free of traffic, the following speeds are possible
: full-track vehicles-day 12 mph, night 7 .5 mph ; half-track
vehicles-day 18 mph, night 9 mph ; motorcycles-day 24 mph,
night 12 mph.
In 24 hours the division can move 90 to 120 miles with fulltrack
vehicles, and 150 to 210 miles with other vehicles .
76. Distances covered by the armored division and its freshness
for the battle are influenced to a decisive degree by the terrain
and the road network . Movement of the armored division is
appreciably influenced by unfavorable weather conditions . This
must be taken into account when missions are assigned .
77 . Early and continuous reconnaissance of roads to be used
in the advance is necessary to insure speed of movement . Engineer
reconnaissance of roads must be combined with that of the
reconnaissance units. Valuable assistance can be obtained from
visual reconnaissance and aerial photographs . This road reconnaissance
will be carried out by reconnaissance detachments
under the command of officers . Normally they will be assigned
their tasks by the commanders of the march columns . Frequently
they will have engineers attached so that any obstacles can be
speedily removed. These detachments may also be called upon to
carry out reconnaissance of rest and assembly areas .
The advance of the division must not be delayed by waiting for
fresh reports as long as the division can withdraw in case of
necessity .
78. Movement and traffic control will be carried out in accord-
20
I
._/
ance with the principles laid down in Movement and Traffic
ontrol.
79. The speed with which all troops of the division can catch up
permits large intervals between individual units and groups within
the march columns, provided the division is allotted roads with no
time limit. In this case, unified control of the march columns is
unnecessary. Individual units form at the times allotted them,
and are in turn given the order to move . By this means the commander
maintains control over movements of the division . If
the foremost elements of the columns are held up, units behind
are not necessarily held up in their turn . The different speeds of
movement in the division are compensated for . omplete march
columns may also be formed without previous assembly .
Large intervals between individual columns necessitate strict
traffic control in order to prevent other troops from mingling in the
movement of the division . If the higher command lays down
definite times during which the division is to use certain roads,
intervals between individual march columns must be so regulated
that the roads are cleared within the time allotted .
80. If sufficient roads are available, the advance will normally
be made in several columns, but if there is a possibility of contact
with the enemy, the lateral interval between march columns must
be such as to allow the division to concentrate swiftly for unified
employment .
81 . The intention of surprising the enemy, as well as the threat
of air attack, frequently makes night marches necessary . The
division will lay down the degree of lighting necessary .
Speed in night marches depends upon, visibility . When no
lights are used for driving, speed must be dictated by considerations
of safety. Road reconnaissance and clear signposting are
indispensable in night marches .
82. Liaison between the division commander and his tactical
group and the march columns, march groups or individual units
on the move must be insured by liaison officers, messengers, and
radio. Radio sections detached for this purpose listen in, even
during periods of radio silence .
It is desirable to establish points along the main route of
advance with which units moving on other roads can establish
timely liaison. Liaison over long distances can be established
21
by means of aircraft. They can also be employed to cover the
movement of the division and report the points reached by individual
columns . Within the march columns and march groups
liaison will be maintained by messengers .
83. Halts of 20 minutes should be made every 2 hours, or
when necessary . Unified divisional control of timing for the
individual march columns and march groups is essential . Within
a march column no commander may halt independently, even for
a short time, as each halt extends itself to the rear and causes
undesirable blockages and increased gasoline consumption .
A rest is essential under normal conditions after a 4- to 5-hour
movement. It conserves the gasoline supply and can be used
to give the drivers food and rest . It should last for at least 3
hours.
Rest areas must be reconnoitered in advance . They must
permit a rapid resumption of the advance . Rest areas for troops
on wheeled vehicles and motorcycle troops are generally close to
the road ; for tracked vehicles they are some distance from the
road.
84. Long marches make the same demands on vehicles of the
division as does battle itself . After 4 or 5 days' operations it is
essential, in order to maintain efficiency of the armored division,
that time be allotted for recovery and overhaul . If the situation
or military necessity forbid this, the commander must accept
the fact that parts of the division will be temporarily unfit for
service .
Frequently a rest of several hours will be sufficient to repair
damaged vehicles . Troops must be informed of the duration of
the rest period .
Section II
MAR H ORGANIZATION
85 . With the rapidly changing situation of the armored division,
there is no hard and fast rule for march organization . The command
must adjust march organization to suit a wide variety of
demands.
86. If combat is not expected during the march, wheeled, halfand
fully-tracked vehicles move together .
22
87 . If ce:aact with the enemy is expected during . .e march,
the controlling factors are the task, enemy resistance to be
expected, and the terrain .
88. At the same time, care must be taken to see that units are
allowed to overtake march columns only if the advance elements of
the column are halted in order to leave the road clear and all
traffic from the other direction is held up .
89. If the situation indicates that contact with the enemy will
require immediate employment of the tank brigade, the latter
must be placed well forward in the columns. If, on the other
hand, it can be seen from the situation or the nature of the ground
that tanks cannot be used on first contact with the enemy, then
the motorized infantry will lead . The tanks will follow, be given
a separate route, or will be kept in readiness off the road .
If the situation requires the division to be employed in task
forces, movement will be carried out in mixed march groups.
Their composition will be dictated by requirements of the impending
battle. An attempt should be made, even within mixed
march groups, to assign separate roads to tanks and to other arms .
This must, of course, depend upon the tactical situation and a
suitable road system which allows advance on a broad front .
If important sectors are to be occupied in advance of the
enemy or during pursuit, special mobile advance detachments
may be formed . They hurry on without regard to maintaining
contact with the division behind them . Their composition must
be such that they can quickly break any expected enemy resistance
and brush aside obstacles . Engineers must be allotted to these
detachments .
It may be advisable to place the recgnnaissance forces and
the advance units temporarily under the same command . This
must be ordered by the division .
90. The artillery must be well forward so that it will be prepared
for action .
Engineers are to be assigned to all march columns if special
tasks do not require the concentration of engineer forces .
91. ombat vehicles of all units will be divided into vehicles
which the troops require during action and those which are not apt
to be required immediately. The first group moves with units,
the second will follow either under control of commanders of the
23
march
co-,ns
or under unified control of the divisiG ..j .\,according
to the division commander's decision .
Section III
SE URITY ON THE MOVE
92 . The armored division protects itself against a ground enemy
by early initiation of ground and air reconnaissance .
93 . If early contact with the enemy is expected, the advance
will be covered by an advance guard . If the advance is made
along more than one road, each march column will be allotted an
advance guard .
Strength and composition of the advanced guard are dictated
by the situation, terrain visibility, and strength of the march
column. If the tank brigade follows immediately behind the advance
guard, the fighting strength of the latter may be kept relatively
small . In suitable country, the tank brigade, or part of it,
may take over the duties of advance guard in order to destroy
enemy resistance immediately . If considerable antitank opposition,
road blocks, or natural obstacles are apt to be encountered,
the advance guard should be composed predominantly of motorized
infantry . In most cases artillery, engineers, and antitank
units must be allotted .
94. Areas which have been reported clear of the enemy will be
covered by the advance guard in one bound, except for short halts,
in order to enable the division to advance without hindrance . If
enemy activity is likely, the advance guard may be ordered to
proceed by bounds . This must not interfere with forward movement
of the division .
The interval between the advance guard and units following will
vary according to the strength of the formation and probability of
enemy activity. It may be as much as 1 hour.
If the advance of the division is delayed by road blocks in great
depth or by the enemy rearguard, it may be desirable to separate
those parts of the division which are not immediately required for
removal of obstacles or enemy resistance, and to allow them to
rest off the road until the advance can be resumed smoothly .
This avoids traffic jams and lessens wear and tear on both troops
and engines .
24
95 . Mat columns guard against threats to tha . ~fianks by
reconnaissance. When necessary, forces must be sent along
parallel roads to protect the main group, or must be pushed out to
the flanks of the main route of advance .
96. Antitank defense during movement will be provided by incorporating
antitank detachments in columns which are inadequately
equipped with antitank weapons . The companies of antitank
battalions will, for this purpose, be placed under command of
those groups to which they are to be assigned on deployment .
97 . For antiaircraft defense, light antiaircraft machine-gun
units will usually be assigned to each march column . At bottlenecks
and when the columns are halted, antiaircraft machine-gun
units must be employed en masse . Frequently antiaircraft
troops or antiaircraft machine-gun companies must be sent ahead
with the advance guard in order to provide early antiaircraft
defense at threatened points . Antiaircraft units can be employed
leapfrog fashion during the advance only if halts of considerable
length are made to enable them to push forward again .
Protection from daylight air attack demands full use of cover
and dispersion . The advance must be continued despite enemy
air attack . If this is impossible, the commander will order vehicles
to seek cover off the road with troops dismounted .
All troops and all suitable weapons will be employed in antiaircraft
defense . If road conditions permit, machine gunners will
open fire against low-flying aircraft independently, at the same
time warning other troops . Efforts must be made to obtain
fighter aircraft protection .
By night the advance will be halted only if enemy aircraft
directly attack the troops .
98. The possibility of gas-spray attack from aircraft must
always be borne in mind . Orders must be issued before the advance,
stating whether vehicles will use tarpaulins and whether
troops are to wear antigas capes .
25
hapter 7
DEPLOYMENT
99. As a rule, deployment precedes the division's organization
for battle. It enables units in the rear of the columns to move
quickly into battle, making full use of space for maneuvering.
The longer the columns, the earlier deployment must be ordered .
Increased readiness for battle compensates for the reduction in
speed resulting from advancing deployed .
100. The advance in deployed order is protected by combat
reconnaissance, If the tactical situation demands it, artillery
elements may be employed to cover deployment . Special routes
must then be allotted to the artillery, so that it may take up its
proper position after its support mission is completed .
101. If the division commander has insufficient data at the time
of deploying to lay down objectives to commanders of subordinate
units, the latter must advance by bounds deployed . New
bounds must be ordered early in order to obviate unnecessary
delays when bounds have been reached .
102 . Early orders are necessary for employment of antiaircraft
machine-gun units for the protection of deployment .
26
hapter 8
ATTA K
Section I
GENERAL
103. In armored division combat, the decision is gained by
attack of the entire tank brigade in one body . Employment of
the brigade is therefore of decisive importance . The main effort
will be made where the tanks can find suitable terrain and battle
conditions.
The role of the other units of the armored division is to provide
conditions necessary for employment of the armored brigade,
to support the tank attack, to protect the flanks, and to insure
that success is exploited by close support . The motorized infantry
enables the armored division to seize ground taken by the tanks
and hold it for a considerable period .
104. The armored division must endeavor, by obtaining early
possession of vital points, to open the way for an attack .
105 . If the armored division succeeds in surprising an enemy
ill prepared for defense, the division will attack without deploying .
Attack without deploying can also be considered if the enemy is
advancing to attack . The rapidity with which fire can be brought
to bear and the combination of fire power and movement in the
tank brigade compensate for the enemy's advantage in being
prepared for attack .
Attack is preceded by detailed preparation if the enemy's
defense is organized and antitank defense is expected .
106. The armored division's actual frontage of attack is normally
less than frontage of the sector allotted to it . It depends
upon the tactical situation, the terrain, and the nature and
strength of opposing forces.
An attack against an enemy whose defense is organized requires
concentration of the armored division's forces . Against an inferior
27
11 or demora ized enemy, or where there is little antitank opposition,
a series of attacks at several separated points is frequently successful
. Areas which have natural antitank defenses are well mined,
or are protected by strong antitank organization, may narrow the
attack or impose a temporary division of the attacking forces .
107 . Attack is made easier where the enemy has limited visibility.
Attack at dusk or during darkness may lead to decisive
results and completely disrupt the enemy . Suitable ground and
good roads along which to press home the attack are essential .
Fog precludes observed defensive fire, restricts the movements
of tanks, and makes it difficult to identify the objectives allotted
to them .
Smoke assists the attack of the tanks if it is used to screen flanks
and blot out antitank defenses and observation posts in the
enemy's rear. It can be laid down by attached smoke units,
tanks, or artillery, or can be sprayed or dropped in bombs by air •
craft . Spray from low-flying aircraft is possible only when the
enemy's antiaircraft defense is negligible or neutralized .
Section II
ONDU T OF THE ATTA K
108. Rapid and unexpected attack is the secret of success and
leads to decisive results .
109. In an attack without deployment, the objectives allotted
will generally be distant . Over difficult terrain or where the situation
is not clear, especially when the attack has not been preceded
by ground reconnaissance, the division may move forward by
bounds in order to keep its forces together in readiness for unified
action. Orders must be given early enough so that a steady,
unimpeded advance is maintained and the enemy is given no time
to organise his defense .
110. An axis will be laid down for the attack .
111 . Wherever possible the attack will be led by the tank
brigade. A short halt will usually be necessary in order to provide
the attack with requisite breadth and momentum . A favorable
opportunity will be exploited without delaying to make this preparation,
even if only part of the armored brigade is immediately
28
tank
avaiiable in such a case the remainder of~ the t~a~~k brigade willl
follow deployed, so that it may immediately be thrown into the
attack if the enemy's resistance stiffens .
112 . The success of the tank attack depends upon neutralizing
the enemy's antitank defense. All arms must support the tank
attack to this end .
113. The motorized infantry follows the tanks in vehicles,
deployed, as long as the enemy's fire allows . Troops dismount
in order to attack defense areas which the tank brigade has not
destroyed.
ontact between the tank brigade and the motorized infantry
following must not be broken . If there are enemy elements
which have not been attacked by the tanks, or if there is a likelihood
of enemy defense areas resuming activities after the tanks
have passed, the tank brigade must set aside part of its force to
assist the forward movement of the motorized infantry . It may
be desirable to attach part of the tank brigade to the motorized
infantry for this purpose .
114. The attack must be pressed home to the objective regardless
of threats to flanks . Threatened flanks will be protected by
motorized infantry or elements of the antitank battalion . Frequently
sufficient flank protection can be given by reconnaissance .
If the situation allows, it may be advisable to employ forces
farther in rear against an enemy attacking in the flank . This is
not done by diverting them so that they meet the enemy in a
frontal attack, but by using them even farther back so that they
in turn strike at the enemy's flank .
115 . An attack without deployment allows insufficient time to
organize any artillery preparation .
The artillery engages targets which have not been reduced by
the tanks and which impede the progress of tanks and infantry,
Such targets are primarily antitank weapons and defense areas in
country possessing natural tank defense (built-up areas, woods)
within and on either side of the sector in which the tanks are
attacking .
116 . In order to obviate the danger of dispersion of fire in a
rapidly moving battle, the commander must always make sure
that the fire of several batteries is concentrated on a single objective.
The main artillery effort should be concentrated either
29
far ahead of the tanks or outside their sector of attack. No
time ran be laid down for the artillery fire to be lifted . Isolated
targets which appear in the paths of the tanks must be engaged
by the tanks themselves .
117. It must be possible to support the tank attack throughout
its depth with observed fire. Accordingly, observation and command
posts must be pushed well forward before the attack begins,
and fire positions must be so chosen that the artillery fire follows
the line of attack as long as possible .
As a rule, part of the artillery, preferably batteries on selfpropelled
mounts, will be assigned to cooperate with the tank
brigade . The commanders of the tank and artillery units must
make every effort to confer . At the beginning of the battle the
artillery commanders will be at observation posts from which
they can give definite support in early stages of the attack .
118. If the tank attack gains ground, the artillery must be
kept in close support in order to prevent its losing contact in
subsequent stages of the assault . onstant support must be
insured by employing artillery troops in leapfrog fashion .
Artillery commanders will move quickly in command cars to
points from which they can follow the progress of the attack and
support it by concentrated, observed fire . Forward observers
in armored observation vehicles will move with the foremost
tanks .
Artillery liaison officers, who accompany commanders of the
tank units, communicate the latters' requirements to artillery
commanders . In addition, personal contact with commanders
of the tank units should be sought . Radio communication must
be established.
If, after a successful break-through, the tanks find themselves
in country clear of the enemy, all available routes must be used
in order to push the artillery forward with the last wave of tanks
so that they may be ready for action immediately if fresh enemy
resistance is encountered .
119. There must be close cooperation between artillery not
employed in direct support of the tank brigade and one or more
artillery spotting planes . This is essential if enemy artillery
is to be rapidly and effectively engaged and fire brought on important
targets concealed from ground observation .
30
Parts of this artillery will, if their fire can be controlled by
spotting planes, remain in their `re position as long as range of
the guns allows .
One of the most important tasks of the artillery spotter plane
is to keep watch for the appearance of enemy antitank and tank
forces, and to direct artillery fire against these targets . Valuable
data for the choice of fresh targets can be gained by the artillery
commander from listening to the reports of reconnaissance aircraft .
120. The armored engineer battalion will usually be attached to
the tank brigade. It accompanies the tank brigade, removing tank
obstacles encountered during the attack . Material for improvising
crossings over small cuts should be carried . Those parts of the
engineer battalion which are not yet equipped with engineer tanks
must follow as closely as possible behind the tank brigade .
121. The antitank battalion accompanies the tank brigade in the
attack, covering its flank and supporting it in neutralizing enemy
tank and antitank defenses . Antitank units not yet armored or
equipped with self-propelled mounts follow the armored brigade
by bounds, with the special task of engaging enemy tanks attacking
the flanks and rear of the tank brigade .
Parts of the antitank battalion can be employed to provide antitank
defense for the motorized infantry .
122 . Depending upon the air situation and nature of the terrain,
light antiaircraft artillery and machine-gun units attached can be
assigned the task of protecting the tank brigade, artillery, reserves,
and transport vehicle assembly points against enemy air reconnaissance
and attack . Headquarters and important supply
centers, especially for ammunition and gasoline, must frequently
be given protection .
123. Rapid progress of an attack while the division is in motion
rarely allows telephone communications to be established . Frequently
only the most important radio communications will be
possible because of the necessity of maintaining an adequate
reserve to meet unforeseen demands . There must always be
communication with the superior commander, the tank brigade,
the motorized infantry brigade, the artillery, the armored reconnaissance
unit, and the air reconnaissance unit .
124. If, in attacking on the move, the commander of the armored
division decides to use his motorized infantry as the spearhead of
31
attack, it will remain in vehicles as long as the enemy and the terrain
permit. After dismounting, its tactics will follow the principles
laid down for infantry in the attack .
As long as the infantry is moving in vehicles, artillery elements
on self-propelled mounts will follow closely in order to support
their attack rapidly with observed fire .
As soon as the enemy's resistance weakens, the motorized
infantry should return to its vehicles in order to make full use of
their speed.
The tank brigade should be held back until it can be used in
support of the motorized infantry,
Envelopment should be attempted .
The antitank battalion accompanies the motorized infantry
brigade in order to destroy enemy tanks . It may be advisable to
hold back the greater part of the battalion-frequently in rear of
the flanks-in, order to exploit its speed, mobility, and ability to
carry out surprise attacks against tanks . If the enemy's resistance
has been broken by the motorized infantry, the antitank
battalion can be pushed ahead of the foremost infantry in order to
attack and destroy enemy tanks . Advance artillery observers
should be assigned for this purpose .
125. If, after attaining the objectives, the task allotted does not
involve pursuit, the motorized infantry will hold the ground
gained, and will be supported by the tank brigade . This will be
done in accordance with principles laid down for the defense .
If the attack fails or appears likely to lead to no result, the
attacking forces should disengage and attack afresh at another
point .
126 . If the armored division encounters enemy tanks during
the attack, engaging them must take precedence over all other
tasks . The tank brigade must quickly find covered positions from
which it can fire effectively at the halt, while the enemy is compelled
to fight at a disadvantage (attacking over open country,
against the sun, with the wind) . This method is particularly
recommended when the enemy is superior in numbers of antitank
weapons . Success in these circumstances can also frequently be
gained by quick and determined attack, especially against the
enemy flanks .
If the enemy is inferior in numbers or armament, or if it is im-
32
1W
possible to find a favorable position, a short halt should be made
during which all armor-piercing weapons should he brought to
bear on him . The attack should then follow immediately, and
should, if possible, be supported by some elements firing at the
halt .
The rear waves of the tank brigade should be employed as far
as possible in enveloping attacks against the flanks and rear of the
enemy tank forces.
Extensive combat reconnaissance must be carried out by the
division, especially in the flanks and rear of the tank brigade, to
insure that the latter is secure from surprise attacks by enemy
tanks .
The artillery's task is to attack the enemy tanks while they are
deploying, breaking up their attack with concentrated fire .
Section III
ATTA K FROM AN ASSEMBLY POSITION
127. The purpose of an assembly position is to enable detailed
reconnaissance to be carried out, to allow units to take up their
allotted positions for the battle, and to insure cooperation of all
arms participating in and supporting the attack .
128. The assembly area must provide cover against enemy air
and ground observation ; it must be situated far enough forward
to enable the division to advance in battle order ; the artillery
must be able to carry out its tasks of supporting a break-through
without changing its positions, and heavy weapons must be able
to neutralize the enemy defenses, particularly his antitank
weapons.
Usually the tank brigade and those parts of the motorized
infantry which are to follow in vehicles behind the tank advance
will be held back ; so that they remain unexposed to enemy fire
and can eventually be employed with surprise effect . The more
thorough the reconnaissance, the longer it is possible to delay the
approach march and deployment of the tank brigade . If the
terrain permits the tank brigade to adopt its battle formation
well in rear of the battle area and to advance in this order, only a
short halt will be necessary in the assembly area .
The vehicles of those parts of the division which have previously
33
moved into the assembly area must not be allowed to impede
movement of the tank brigade .
129 . Surprise is assisted if the division move's into its assembly
area during dusk or darkness .
130 . Movement into the assembly area and the area itself
must be protected from enemy reconnaissance and surprise attack .
Antiaircraft machine-gun units must be assigned for defense
against enemy reconnaissance and attacking aircraft .
131 . The artillery moves up during the assembly . The
armored observation battery establishes its sound-ranging and
flash-spotting posts and plots enemy positions .
As far as is possible without sacrificing surprise, the engineers
remove tank obstacles in front of enemy positions and make all
necessary preparations for removing obstructions .
The armored signal battalion establishes line communications
within the division in order to supplement radio communications
during battle .
132 . The object of the attack is to break through the enemy's
defensive zone . This object is achieved when the enemy artillery
is destroyed and the enemy's main line of resistance is so broken
that the motorized infantry can follow up in vehicles . Only
after a successful break-through must a distant objective be
assigned .
133 . If there are tank obstacles or natural antitank defenses in
front of or within the enemy defensive position, the first stage of
the attack will be carried out by the motorized infantry alone .
It advances through the enemy main line of resistance until the
obstacles barring the tank advance are removed .
The advance of the tank brigade must be so arranged that when
obstacles are removed it can penetrate deeply into the main enemy
defensive zone, accompanied by the motorized infantry .
134: If it has been possible to remove obstacles in front of the
enemy position before the attack, and no obstacles are likely to be
encountered in the main line of resistance, the attacks of the tank
brigade and the motorized infantry will be launched simultaneously
. By this means the armored division brings all its weapons
to bear effectively at the decisive moment of attack to destroy the
enemy's defenses and lend momentum to the advance .
135. If the terrain is favorable and no tank obstacles have been
34
reported, the tank brigade will precede the motorized infantry in
attack on the enemy position . This a'ssists the movement of the
motorized infantry to the enemy position, speeds the operation,
and reduces casualties .
136, The attack of the tank brigade is carried out according to
the principles of an attack not preceded by deployment .
137 . Targets against which the artillery is to concentrate its
fire before and during the attack depend upon the method of
attack. If the attack is led by the motorized infantry, the main
effort will be directed against enemy infantry weapons . If tanks
precede the motorized infantry in the attack, the artillery's main
task will be to destroy or neutralize with smoke the enemy antitank
weapons. It may be desirable to lay down smoke shortly
before the attack in order to neutralize enemy observation posts
and antitank weapons .
If the enemy is occupying strongly prepared positions, it will
usually be necessary to lay down an artillery preparation which
should be preceded by careful target reconnaissance .
If surprise is to be gained, or if the tactical situation is obscure,
it is frequently advisable to delay opening fire until enemy
resistance is encountered, and then to destroy it with concentrated
fire. As the attack progresses, artillery support is governed by
the same principles that apply to an attack not preceded by
deployment .
138 . If the motorized infantry leads the attack, it will have
armored engineers attached, Elements of the armored engineer
battalion follow closely behind the motorized infantry brigade to
clear the way for the tanks following .
139. The bulk of the antitank battalion will be attached to the
motorized infantry leading the attack ; elements will be allotted to
protect movement forward from the assembly positions .
140 . If the armored division attacks through an infantry division,
all forces of the infantry division operating in its sector will
be attached to the armored division . This insures that :
a. All weapons and troops of the infantry division are concentrated
under a unified command in support of the tank attack .
b . Movements of the armored division and the infantry division
are coordinated .
This arrangement will end when the main body of the armored
35
division is no longer in contact with the infantry . It will frequently
be necessary for the higher command to hold up movement
of the infantry division in order to allow the armored
division to continue its advance .
141 . If the armored division is ordered to give fresh momentum
to an attack by other troops, the attack will be carried out either
by the tank brigade or simultaneously by the tank brigade and
the motorized infantry brigade . The attack will be supported by
the mass of the armored division's artillery and antitank units .
142 . The higher commander will decide whether the whole or
parts of the division shall be temporarily diverted from the original
axis of attack in order to widen a breach in the enemy's position .
Provision will be made to cover the new flank which is thus formed .
143 . If the armored division is ordered to exploit success
gained by an infantry division with the object of developing it
into a complete break-through, the attack will always be carried
out by the tank brigade . The motorized infantry will follow in
vehicles as closely as possible behind the tank brigade . Strategic
objectives will be assigned . As it is important not to dissipate
efforts of the armored division but to maintain strictest concentration
in view of tasks which remain after the break-through, the
artillery and other heavy weapons will be employed only insofar
as they are necessary for completion of the break-through .
36
hapter 9
PURSUIT
144. Success must be exploited without respite and with every
ounce of strength, even by night. The defeated enemy must be
given no peace . The only factors which must be allowed to cause
a temporary halt are exhaustion of fuel and ammunition, and
even then contact must be maintained . The attack must be
resumed as soon as fresh supplies have been received .
145. Every effort should be made in pursuit to overtake the
enemy. If the enemy succeeds in maintaining a front in its withdrawal,
the armored division must break through the enemy
resistance at several points and use its speed to occupy ground in
the path of retreat . The nature of the terrain and strength and
attitude of the enemy decide whether the tank brigade is to be
pushed forward in mass formation or in task forces .
Night attacks are likely to be particularly successful .
146. If there is danger of losing contact with the enemy, elements
possessing greater speed, i . e ., motorized infantry, motorcyclists,
and antitank units, will be employed in the pursuit . In
this case, engineers will be assigned . If reinforced by equally
mobile forces, the armored reconnaissance unit can strike swiftly
and with decisive results .
147 . If the division has penetrated deep into the enemy lines in
its pursuit, it will establish a system of defense areas for its
protection at rest and by night . They should be designed to
enable heavy fire to be directed from every side .
148 . If enemy resistance stiffens, all forces engaged in pursuit
must be concentrated quickly under unified command for a fresh
attack .
149 . Strong artillery forces must always move directly behind
the foremost elements . Strict cooperation with division reconnaissance
aircraft is essential . Fighter and bomber support
increase the chances of success .
37
18
Provisional Instructions for Leadership and Action
of the Tank Regiment and Tank Battalion
(British Translation of aptured German Document,
May 1941)
2
ommander,-in hief of the Army
Army General Staff / General of the Mobile Tro
NOT E
Until the final instructions for Tank Re gima nt s
and Tank Battalions will be published, tha present
"Provisional Instructions . for :Leadership and Action of
the Tank .Regiment and Tank Battalion" will be valid .
---000---
V .
HARA TERISTI S AND ORGANIZATION _5
ONTROL 6
ON THE MAR H 6
DEPLOYMENT 8
A TION .. . 9
Attack from the Move . . .
. :;11
Attack from the Ready ,Position :'<
, , , . . , .
Repulsing lose: Range''Attacks
Tank v. Tank-
:Action--'Attacks across 'River s
Attack o f a Position `%Vith~ Permanent :De fences
O N T E N T S
D . Breaking off Action
E . Action under Special onditions .
Action in Fog
Action in Built-up Areas . and in
Action in, the Mountains
VI . PRO EDURE WHEN EN OUNTERING MINES 20
_,.VII. A +MMOIiATION : 21
VIII. TRANSPORT, MAINTENAN E AND MEDI AL SERVI ES 22
IX . SUPPLY 23
Appendix 1 :.
Formations and Movements of the Battalion .
Appendix 2 :
March Tables ) Densities and Speeds of, the
Tank Battalion and Tank Regiment .
Appendix 3 :
The Basic Line of Advance . .
Appendix 4 :
Diagram of Supply Services .
Appendix 5 :
Diagram showing employment of Maintenance
8arvices .
HARA TERISTI SandO.RGANISATION
l .
TheT Regiment. Owing to its great fire power,
its armour and is mobility, the Tank Regiment is,the main
driving force of the Division . Its strength lies in merciless
surprise .attack in close formation._ Enthusiastic and
responsible leadership and the daring launching of this
powerful assault weapon, in the decisive sector guarantee
atccess. The other weapons support the Regiment in the
execution of its fighting task .
In pr, inc iple , it . fights ,
within the orbit of the Armoured Brigade .. K
2.
3.
The Tank Regiment consists of &
Two Tank Battalions . xx
One Tank Workshop ompany.
The Tank Battalion usually goes into action within
the sphere of the Tank Regiment . Each Tank Battalion* is
equipped with the same number of tanks and weapons .
Regimental Headquarters with Signal Platoon and Light
Tank Platoon.
Battalion Headquarters.
Headquarter ompany, with Signal : Section, Recorinaissance
Section, Light _Tank Section, Pioneer Section and
A. A. Section.. .
Two to three light companies . xxx
One medium company.
One light column .
x
If there i s only one Tank Regiment in the Division it comes
directly under Divisional Orders .
Mx In the intermediary period there are also regiments with three
battalions . In such cases these instructions will be applied
accordingly .
xxx These instructions axe based upon the organisation of battalions
with three light companies .
- 6 -
II . ONT ROL.
5 .
'-Daring and flexibility are essential in . commanding
a Tank Unit . ommanders . carry their troops to victory ty their
,personal.l example . areful map study of the ground must precede
the action . Air photographs can provide valuable clues for
appreciation of the terrain to be. attacked.
6 .
The sur%risily, of the enemy must be assured by constant
and carefull camouflage and by speed of-movement .-
7 .
Forces must be kept together. for united and simultaneous i
action.
Any splitting - up must be avoided.',
8 .
The Regimental ommander infcmms>`Battalion ommanders ;
as early as possible about the situation, ground • and intention
so as to enable them to act according'to . .his'intentions even . if
the situation should suddenly change .'.
- .."
9 .
The Battalion ommander must 'inform. ompany ommanders
in time about his intention .so that-they: can : acquaint,:their
units with their respective tasks. As.. . a ,rule
Is done by
verbal orders .
10.
Transmission of orders within the Regiment is chiefly
by WIT (W/T instructions D .612/12) . -'Wireless , silence will .
usually be' ordered, and W/T will only be resumed immediately
before going into action . Therefore, orders will be trans
matted as long as possible by D .R. In amp_ and in the
assembly area telephone connexion can be established. ,
11 .
On good roads with no traffic, full-track vehicles
can travel at a speed of 20 k .p .h.. by day and l2 k.p .h. by
night .
12 .
On the march, Divisional orders 472 and the orders
of the Army High ommand, General Staff Training (II) No .
2600/40 (Secret) of 4 DE . 40 will be followed .
13 .
Always endeavour to separate track . vehicles from
wheeled vehicles. This spares the material and helps to
maintain the continuity of the march .
The only wheeled vehicles remaining with track
vehicles are those required for control, intercommunication,
J (maintenance) and S (medical) Services, as well as the most
essential fuel and supply vehicles of the A Echelon battle
transport and part of the salvage section of the Tank Workshop
ompany .
- 7 -
14 . Marchingorders must contain :
Information about the enemy,
Own intentions,
March, route and objective, recorne.ios :~nce,
Security,
Time of departure .
Order of March (including allocation of _transport columns,
Maintenance and Medical Services),
Starting point ('einfl0elungspunkte) . of 'the Battalions
(in Battalion orders: of the Units),
Halts,
Position of the leader 'nd special orders forr intercommunication.
Furthermore, when marching . by night the scale of illumination
(Beleuchtungstufe), as ordered by Division-
When issuing orders bear in mind . that owing to 'the
large area usually covered by a division, very oftan more ,
than one hour elapses between the issue of the order and the
first' move . Warning orders which inform the troops of the
probable starting, time and direction of the march, or, of -- the
time and place of their joining in, are . there fore often
advisable .
It is the art of leadership so t6 .- arrange that
formations and units take up their ordered position in the
marching column without any considerable interruption of
movement and without interference with the movement of other
formations or units .
Regiment .
15 .
If the TankRegiment forms a m rching group within
the Division, the ohmander is responsible for the speed and
continuity of movement on the -march and also for the timely
clearing of the roads at the time specified . He' orders halts -
end rests, security and camouflage, end sees to the refuelling
and supply of the marching group .
If the marching group moves alone he can also be
made responsible for the reconnaissance, security and marking
of the route .
When the regiment halts, units, as well camoufl;Eged
as possible, will keep off the track in sucha viqy • that they
can resume the march at shortest notice . .
16 .
Attached pioneers are_ ;to be'-placed well forward in
the r--- iment.
17 .
Intercommunication on the mace •, within-the -Regiment,
by D . R .
18 :
If the Regiment has X.A.Units_ at its di soosal their
timely employment "at dangerous p+~ots, e .g. bridges and defile-§jmust
be anticipated and provided for .
19 .
If the Regiment moves as advanced guard-of the Armoured
Division, it-usually throws-out a . screen of . the strength of a
light Tank ompeny, (Point ompany) 7 which may be up to fifteen
minu .es ahead., The Point ompany is always-reinforced by
attached pioneers, and in most cases also by medium tanks and
parts of the Reconnaissance section of the foremost battalion .
Attached artillery on motorised gun carriages (Sfl . 1
is allocated behind the foremost battalion in the main column .
The Regimental ' ommander moves be tweerf advanced and
main column.
Battalion.-
20 .
If a Tai.k Battalion moves alone on a -road, paragraphs
15 -18 will apply . '
21.
. If a Tank Battalion .is empio
&a.,advanced muard
paragraph' 19 will a, ply ; the battalion commander .will then move :'
with the . point ompany.
22.
If the Tank Battalion moves . in- anothsr: part"`: of the
marching column, the Battalion. ommander: will. usually move at
the _head of the battalion.-.. Then follow'; the omm€'nd. Group,
Medium ompany, Light . ompnies., • A :- .,Echelon_Battle Transport`,
and the remainder, of:: eadgaarter. (=pany.;;_
23 .
The A.A. Section of the battalion : is mostly distributed
-between the Front Line (fighting echelon)'and'''the wheeled
transport, echelon, so : as to protect the se from .low ;flying enemy
air attacks .
24 .
The opening of the battle is usually preceded by
.deployment. This makes the formation readier frn action aril .'
-shortena its depth.. The Armoured Formation will shy e itself
wiiih 'a iiview to creating the most favourable conditions for action .
Orders for deployment are usually given by . the superior
commander . They can also be given by, regimental- . or battalion
commanders when . they are in charge of the advanced guard or of
an independent marching colLumn .
If the armoured formation unexpectedly contacts the
enemy, or if it is forced to leave the road. by
enemy aircraft or
artillery, it will be deployed on the orders of, its : commander or
of the local commanders .
-
Double file or arrow head will be formed according to
the ground .
If information about the enemy and orders already
issued provide a sufficient indication of tree probable method
of action, inverted arrow head formation-may be adopted by . the
battalion during deployment . -For execution sae .APPENDIX 1 .
(Formation aril Movements of-the Battalion) .
Deploynant is usually executed from the move . .,
lose reconnaissance should begin with deployment,
at the latest .
V . A T I 0 N .
26 .
The strong offensive power of armoured weapons
produces the best . effect when the Tank Regiment goes into
action in close formation .
The Tank Battalion attacks alone,
a. as advanced guard, in order to strike the enemy by
surprise while ha is still unprepared ; or. in order'
to occupy points . on the ground which are important %. :
for the further conduct of the battle ;
b . From the move, if there is no order to wait for the
forming up of the armoured formations following ;.
. When it has an independent task.
BATTLE ORDER.
Regiment .
27 .
The Tank invent can attack with two battalions'
one behind the other in two waves) or =one, alongside the ,other . K
If the Regiment is fighting within the Brigade, _the,. :
latter decides the battle order .
28.
The attack by the Regiment-in waves strikes - the-enemy
a blow the weight of which is continually maintained "by --the
ompanies of the rear wave . This makes a battle. in depth
possible .
Formation in depth is .the best protection of the
flank of a regiment fighting in the enemy's . zone of resistance .
The attack in waves facilitates the control of the
Regiment .
It - is .the rule .
29 .
Action with two battalions: side side aid with .
little depth may be useful in the pursuit of an-already :
weakened enemy, or whenn breaking off action in order to
(counter) -attack a pursuing enemy .
30.
If the Regiment w ants. to concentrate the forces of
battalions fighting side by side towards the centre, it orders
"central line" (advance on one axis) .
31 .
The Regimental omme.rnerr moves in front of the
Regiment, till he has ascertained that the first wave has
attacked in the direction ordered .
He then-takes his position
as far in front as will ensure him a good view - of .the action
of the first wave and enable him to influence the action of the
second wave .
If the Regiment disposes of three battalions (Abteilungen),
the third battalion can be employed as a second or third
35 .
Battalion .
1.0
For the attack, the TankBattalion forms up in sevaral
lines, the composition of which depends upon the position of the
enemy, the task, the . width of the available space, the field of
view and the position of the Battalion in the battle order of
the Regiment .
As a rule the light companies make ., up the first line ;
the medium company usually fights in the so c and . line so as to
provide covering fire for the light companies . The third
light company follows in the third line either behind the
exposed flank or behind the centre of gravity .
33 .
Endeavour to bring-up the medium company in closed
formation for covering fire . This is, conditional ; upon :
lear view of the ground,
Elevated fire positions, or gaps,
forward
ompanies
A not too great front of. attack_for .:.the=:Tank
Battalion, (not ovsr .1200 :metres) .
A poor field of . view may necessitate •'thd~'allocation
to the light companies of platoons or half platoons-',of themedium
company .
If-axial advance is ordered by the Regiment, the
Front Line ompany attacking along the axis gives ; the .dire.ction
:within the Battalion . If the . Regiment, has ordered: a ' sector _to
be attacked. by the Battalion,, the latter can concentrate along _an
axis indicated by it .
The Battalion , ommander moves in -front"" of =the
Battalion till ahscee rthaainsedd, ; that the .battalion .has';taken
= . up' the direction and the right 'frontage for ; the at `tack.. He
then takes up his position far enough forward to have - a good
view of the battle field and to be able to influence the action
of the rem' . companies. . The ommaxider of the second wave must,
if the ground permits, also be able to observe the action of the :-
rear, parts of the first wave .
36 .
The order for attack must contain :'
Information about the enemy, own situation,
neighbouring units.
Intention of the Regiment (the Battalion)
Objective of attack .
Battle order of the Regiment (the Battalion .
Orders for the waves (to the ompanies) . ;
o-operation with .other weapons .
Direction, axial line or touch.
Orders for Heedgiarter Units .
Orders for maint3nancee and Medical. Services .
Orders for battle transport (if Battalion, only to .
A Echelon) and wheeled vehicles .
Intercommunication, line of assault .
Position of ommander.
37'. Attack from theMove .
When attacking from the •move` it is essentiall to'.'.strike
the enemy quickly and by surprise without splitting up one -'s
own forces .
To form battle order, a halt 'for forming up is
usually necessary . This must be done under the best possible
cover from enemy observation and weapons . It must be carried
out quickly -so as to leave the enemy no time to prepare his
anti-tank weapons . The readier the unit was during deployment,,
the shorter the halt for forming up will be
39.
Unexpected encounters with the enemy or ground
-conditions (for instance flghtirg one' s way out o f a' de file) may
necessitate an attack from column of march or from narrow battle
formation. As soon as the leading tanks have cleared room for
the deployment of the tanks 'following, 'and as . soon as the .ground
end the enemy situation permit,, battle order .must be taken Up .
Regiment.
lose reconnaissance' by the light - section of -the
Regiment gives- the cornrrk4nder the - necessary information for-his
plan of action and his ch~ oice
regiment. In particular
to decide the suitability
for A .F.V . blocks and cbs
If the Rsg3.ment has tho e: .posed . flanks, orders-must
be given 'to which flank the battalions are to reconnoitre . -
Endeavour must be - made to :establish .early liaison with
the weapons which ar3 to support or accompany the attack of the
Regiment.
41.
When attacking from the move,, the regiment usually
brings up its battalions in line . In that case it is the task
of the first wave to smash the enemy and penetrate as deeply ,as
possible .
+
The second wave is brought up in such a manner that
it can go into action from depth. The ' battle objectives will
often only become clear during . the course of . the attack .
42,
lose liaison during the attack : with the ommander of the
co-operating artillery is of particular importance as, when
attacking from the move
I
there will be' little information about
the enemy before the start of the attack and there will usually
be only a teas moments for a verbal exchange of views. If the
Artillery ommander does not accompany the Regimental ommander
in the ommand tank, liaison Is kept up by Artillery Liaison
Headquarters .
of battle formation - for his
, , there must be,thoro~.~gh'.reconnaiss~t.~ce
of the ground for tank attack, -also
tacle s. '
The artillery must-be . informed, of the,, attack orders,
the width, axial line and objective of the attack.'
It must continuously receive requests for action
against those objectives which the regiment . cannot fight with
its own weapons .
43 .
The Pioneer Section and attached elements of the
Armoured Pioneer Battalion are often attached to the first wave .
44 .
- Immediate reports of the objectives reached by the
regiment are to be forwarded by the commander to . higher formation..
Battalion .
45 .
As soon as the Battalion ommander `receives the :,rder
for action, he will bring up . his light platoon to the front or,_-,. I
to the exposed flank of the Battalion so as_to- ;supplement the
I
close reconnaissance ca¢'ried out by the Regiment. ( Reinforce
me•nt of . the light -platoon by tanks of the light-. c•ompanie a. may be
necessary.
From the move, the Battalion will, usually.p.. at-tack - in
4.nverted arrowhead formation .
During the attack, covers fire for . the further
advance of the companies must always arranged For this
purpose, the medium company must be brought up . from .sector to. . .
sector. . . Touch between the first ., and second waves' must never
be .*lo st .
4?.
The Artillery ommanderandObserver will accompany .,_
the attack of the foremost elements in the O. P. Tank and, at the
request of the Battalion ommander, will direct 'artillery' fire
chiefly against those :enemy weapons which are . not dealt with by,:,•
the attack of the battalion . . If, in exceptional cases' a
battery of artillery -must co-operate with a tank :battalion, fire
control is also exercised by artilllieairsyonn headquarters .
49 .
Before moving up to the point of assembly,,the approach
roads and , the assembly point must be reconnoitred., . They must
provide cover from enemy ground and air observation . . , The'
assembly -point should, if possible, also be within reach of tha
wheeled vehicles necessary for supply.
50.
At assembly point the Regiment forms up for the attack
as far as space and ground .will permit and prepares for . action .
51 .
All preparations necessary for the launching of the
attack must be made . Amongst these are :
- .Thorough reconnaissance of the ground to be attacked ..,
- Removal of blocks and obstacles in front of the main
enemy battla position . ;
- Obtaining of all information necessary for ; the attack
by means of close reconnaissance . -
I
- Establishment of liaison with the ommanders o f
supporting and accompanying weapons . .
- Establishment pf .liaison with the commanders' of
formations and units which are already in contact' with
the enemy in the area of attack .
- Under certain circumstances, establishment of liaison
with the-commanders . of infantry and rifle formations
which attack before the armoured formations.
The results of the recoiuihissance by all arms and all
weapons of located enemy centres of resistance ~ especially their
anti-tank weapons and artillery, must be exploited .
52 .
The picture .of the ground over which the - attack i is to
take place should be painted to ompany ommanders and as many
subordinate commanders as possible I provided that' by sb doing
the intention to attack is not given away (to the enamy) . .
Wireless silence at the assembly point will be
observed, so that the enemy can get no inkling :of an impending .
tank attack through increased WIT activity .
54.
The armoured formations should be moved from assembly
point in battle 'order . - If the ground does not permit thisi
a short halt for forming up will also be required when attacking
from the ready positions
Regiment.
55 .
If the Regiments attacks in several waves, thefirst
wave will usually be ordered quickly to gene trate deep into the
main enemy_. battle position and to destroy' the enemy artillery .
The secondwave, which follows immediately, will'
overpower those enemy infantry and heavy weapons which have not
been smashed by the . attack of the first wave . In simultaneous
attacks - with- riflemen and infantry, the second wave enables the
former to .follaw up quickly -to exploit succe$#
66 .
If the Regiment is .ordered to helpforward the attack
of infantry or riflemen, the commander of the tank regiment is
responsible for the maintenance of touch between his raiment
and the riflemen . The Regiment details certain of its elements,
usually only up to the strength of a light company, for direct .
co-operation with or attachment. to the riflemen . .
J? . The Regimental ommas der can detail the second wave
to bring up its medium tank ;compaziy: .;to reinforce the covering
fire for- the penetration of~`the ~fir'st wave .
In this case, it
is not usually necessary to attach this company to the first
w aye .
58 . After successful penetration, the assault must be
quickly carried on deep into he main enemy battle position .
This is the quickest . and safest way - of breaking the enemy' s
resistance .
59 .
if parts of the anti-tankbattalion are . attached to the
regiment, they form up in several waves immediately behind the
first wave so as to assist it in overpowering the enemy anti-tank
weapons during the penetration . After, penetration, they are
usually brought up behind the exposed flank off the first'wave . in
such a. manner that they can support it in an encounter with enemy
tanks and also eov?r the flank of the regiment,
60. lose co-operation with the Pioneers who accompany the
attack in pioneer tanks is. essential to ensure the quick removal
of all A .F .V . blocks and . _obstacles w- hich-might hold up the attack
deep into the main enemy battle position. During the removal of
obstacles protection_ of the pioneers by tanks may. •be necessary .
B.attalion
61 .
62.
When attacking in .waves , the"Battalion •,of, ths= first wave
will, ass long as it i.s not engaged in_.,fighting the enemy anti-tank.
weapons, also engage located' heavy enemy we anons and centres :of.
resistancet but this, must not, cause .deviation 'fr.om the accomplishment
of the main tasks.
After having reached -the -objective , of- .- the ;;,attack, the
ommander immediately organises the Battalion in, the' necessary
battle formation for further .action . Enemyw counter attacks must
=always find the Battalion-,ready: to attack : (in-+turn) . :
In the second wave' the . medium :.componf, which will' be
the support for the first wave, is to be kept well up',-.w ith the
latter . This effectively provides for covering fire .'-for the
light companies 'against -anti-tank weapons ., which have-;not been
located or overpowered by the first wave, The light' companies
.must seek-out and destroy any,,enemy,'not. destroyed by the first
wave .
ti:
One of the main, tasks of the second wave .will be . to
repel enemy : counter-attacks directed e g°ainst, .the .tank ;, attack , .
and the. -riflemen which follow it . , _ ' In order :toL .be able to do.,;,-
this, arrangements should be made when forming .up ;•the : second .
wave, (after penetration),, for the .employmer.%.t,of ...tba .,veiht :of
the medium company at the decisive point.
After penetration, the quick resumption of .'olose
reconnaissance, especially on the exposed flank, .is ...important .
REPULSING LOSE RANGE ~TTYi KS .
64 .
lose range attacks by the enemy, chiefly using Molotov
ocktails, must be expected especially when penetrating. the main
enemy battle position and also in forests and built up areas,
particularly when the enemy shows a strong will to resist .
The danger of close range -attacks grows with the
following :- reduction-in speed of tanks owing to enemy
resistance ; certain ground conditions ; limited visibility ;
when ground obstacles compel tanks to ; halt . When . tanks are
compelled to slow down or halt, ',therefore', they must' arrange
with' each other for careful mutual observation and . fire
protection . Units and formations must also arrange for close
range reconnaissance and protection of their front, flanks and
rear .
Only by doing this will it be possible to shake off and
destroy the enemy, who is usually well camouflaged and will
attack only from very close quarters, taking advantage of the
blind spots both of :he weapons and field of view of the
individual tanks .
TANK v. TANK A TION .
65 .
Decisive in tank v. tank action are :
Lightning appreciation of situation and ground : and
immediate action by leaders of . every rank ;
Timely realisation of the strength and direction of
the enemy tank attack ;,
Knowledge of the mechanical and fighting powers of
the enemy tanks .
66 .
As soon as enemy tanks appear they must be attacked and destroyed with all available anti-teak weapons, even if this
should entail abandoning the original task._ The quicker action
is taken, the quicker the exmoured ewnielmly;_ be destroyed and
the sooner the original task can be resumed .
It is up to :close reconnaissance to locate the enemy flank as early as possible .
68 .
For the destruction of en armoured • enemy all forces
must,combine for united action . . - It is essential that a strong
fire 'front should quickly be .formod so that the enemy can be
surprised with fire and compelled to halt' .in his-attack. . . This
will .prepare the ground for the action of . the rear waves. It
will' depend on one's own strength, the ground and the weather
whether - the front, the flank or the rear . of.,the •enemy armourad
forces is to be attacked .
Always try to fight against thweindd' with the-: bun'
behind and to engage ,. the .- front of .: thr . enemy;., tanks in such a .,' way that they expose thsir,.vulnza'able flanks :, to the regiment
leading the counter attack . If the - action is carried out in waves the regimental commander will arrange for the first wave
to make the frontal attack while the second wave, using all
- advantages of favourable ground and,full. speed, will be . thrown -
forward to deal the annihilating blow to the flank and rear of
the enemy .
69 . Attached anti-tank troops on motorised gun carriages
(Sfl.) accompany the tank,attack. _ o-operating artillery and
heavy weapons support the action of the' .ermoured formation with
concentrated fire .
70.
In order quickly to avoidd the- aimed fire of enemy
tanks, a.npe'ing unexpectedly, also to ain, time . for the
formation of a fire front and to con eal'the movements of the
rear waves and lines, it may be advisable to make a smoke screen
.between one's own and the enemy .tanks .
71 .
If a tank battalion is unexpectedly-attacked by enemy
tanks the -companies will begin b,y rebulsing the attack indenen
dently .
The battalion commander wi)..l endeavour to regain
control, over his battalion a s quickly as possible .
- 15 -
Details of the measures to be taken by 'craws when
attacked at close quarters and when . tanks are . immobilised%are
given in'Divisional Order 470/5b, paragraphs 81 . to 83 .
ATTA KS A RrSS RIVERS .
73 .
The tasks of the tank regiment when attacking across ,
a river are :
- T o clear the near bank of
- To provide fire cover for themoving: up : of the bridging
material and the forming up of 'the cross ing ~ unit
(tibersetztruppe ), ,
Support of the attack; .of the crossi unit-by. .eigaging -
enemy centres of resistance `and _fi
y extending the
bridgehead formed= by, then crossing,:unit.
?4 .
The' coveringfire . for 'the ::preparation, a crossing .;-~:;
f
and the attack across the 'river is: usually' .provided by;, the
medium companies from concealed and - frequently .:~changed :firing
If enemy tanks try evasive action they. must be morcilessly
pursued. Increase of-speed to the very -limit will be necessary
to outflank the snengr tanks and to cut them off from their line of
retreat.- In this case . co-operation with reconnaissance aircraft
will be increasingly important.
I positions.
7 Tank Battalions ' or =units ; detailed- to', .mop ::up _-the,
approaches-will., in case' of enemy air or;. artillery-, attacks r _ be .
placed in widely extended formation and in such .a tanner that
they-.do not interfere with the, movements of : the '.crossing, units
and of. the bridging party. (pioneers) . , - ' The. non-employed a laments'.
are kept far back, usually, behind -the -,reserve, line :`(ablauflinie)
laid down by the Division .'
After a small bridgehead has ,been formed .:by'Itbe
attacking infantry it will often be necessary quickly to ferry
over tank units with anti-tank, weapons, . so .,as to. extend the
infantry bridgehead or to help in . maintaining the ':position . : .
The first elements of the :tank units brought . across
will usually havra to support the - infantry fighting on the far:,
bank.
enemy: forces,
7
-If the regiment has to attack on the enemy side
immediately after crossing the br dge,the - regimental commander
and commander of the front battalion must - quickly ; : obtain a picture
of the ground to be attacked . They will cross to . the far bank
in their command tank, before the . termination of the- bridging
operations, if possible .
The-liht platoons will cross with
the leading parts of the regiment so* that they can- immediately'be
detailed for close reconnaissance . Of the units of the leading
battalion, the medium company will cross first.
78_
The assembly of the regiment after the - drawn out
crossing . of the brid.ge will take a long time .
Therefore, at
least the first battalion over must be assembled as soon as
possible in order to avoid
going into action split up .
If the bridgehead is small it may be necessmy for the first
units over to attack, after a short f :rming up halt, in order
to make enough room for assembly .
ATTA K K A POSITION WITH PEFdufANENT DEFEN ES.
79 .
The bulk of the tank regiment is kept back, if possible
under cover from enemy fire from the permanent defences, until
gaps have been made .in the anti-tank
o.bstacles
lose touch with the pioneers Who remove -A.F .V . blocks
and obstacles is to be maintained.
80.
The-armoured formation will most need covering fire
when driving through the gaps in the anti-tank defences . .and during
the subsequent forming up-into battle order in the enemy main
battle position . Screening of the flanks with . smoke may be
us€ful .
The objective .of 'the.` _armoured attack .i s the enemy
artillery.
The most important task. of close reconnaissance is to
prevent the armoured formation, from meeting with unexpected
obstaclea, particularly mines, inside the main battle position.
Tank Pioneers must be placed far forward to locate and remove
such obstacles .
81.
Parts of the armoured formation, in particular the
medium, companyy ..;.support -the . unit which is to penetrate the main
enemy attle position by engaging enemy . - centres of resistance in
the intermediate position, if possible from concealed . fire .
positions .
-THE PURSUIT .
82 .
Once the a newti g ive s ,' he must be completely br okdn up
and annihilated by unremittir pursuit, even into the night .
Only lack of fuel and ammunition c an. be allowed to . halt,
temporarily, the pursuit .
The personal example of" the commanders is all-important .
Battle Groups-are often formed to carry out .the pursuit
on a Wide front or. i, order to be able to . use detachments for an
overtaking puirsuit- (ttberholende Verfolgung) . Their composition
and control is -laid . down .. in regulations D66X .
The tank, battalion pursues in broad arrowhead formation,
,if possible in front of the other ° arms . ,
84 .
Maintenance 'of touch is of particular importance in the
pursuit . Troops of the medium- company are-usually attached :to
the light companies for this purpose .. The concentrated battalion
must quickly smash any .enemy resistance`- or counter attack . Should
enemy resistance increase,' the regimental commander must endeavour
to bring-his unit to the attack in close formation.
85 .
In the 'pursuit, particular'care ~,mast .-be given to the
keeping up of intercommunication. -Frequent reports on 'bounds
reached-and on the llooccaattiioonn of the . defeated' enemy forces . will be
forwarded to superior commanders .
86.
If the -pursuit is extended into the night, pursuit
groups ar3 usually formed along the roads . Forces must be kept
close together . Advancing by bounds may be advisable .
8- .
9
If, after the _objective of:::the - attack:~hae'.been reached'
the Tank Regiment has to -defend ground--gained .-until-relieved by
other arms, the bulk of -: the :tanks are to k.ep,t back till the
enemy attack begins . ' They;, will be protected from _.enemy
artillery and aircraft by., dispersion: and tYie use of-, coven positions . :
89 .
The armoured ;formation must protect :itself against
enemy surprise attacks by : careful . closereconnaissance,
particularly in country . with limited visibility Y- .. Reinforcement
of the light tank platoons may be nece ssary for this. . I
-
90.
Enemy reconnEi ssance' is hindered:, by
fire of
individual tanks with .long range weapons.
ese-,tanks should
frequent7.v change their position.
If the enemy attacks he is .,kept :at~bay by prompt
opening of concentrated fire . The , armoured formations and
units which . were kept back .will be brought up for counts- attack
in the most profitable direction, if possible against .A48_e enemyflank.
92 .
In case of an attack by enemy t
conducted according to paragraphs 64 to 7
87 .
If night causes a 'halt in the pursuit formations will,
i; if . .,possibls , ;,halt in. anti-.tank. countr.y:. :' .,:,Armoured: .div lions must
be formed up so as to be able to bri uninterrupted firs to bear
in all directions (hedgehog formation . To avoid major casuals
ties in case of enemy bombing orr raids, vehicles must be formed
up with gaps between them. Wheeled vehicles -and the lightly
armoured vehicles will be in the middle-
Advanced-reconnaissance sections on foot constitute
the covering party . They call the prompt :, defensive fire of the
.tanks by prearranged signals .
If the armoured formation must break off -action against
armn-armoured enemy, it- will withdraw under the cover of the
medium companies supported by the fire of the co-operating
artillery .
As soon as the light company . is no ,- longer within
range of the enemy anti-tank weapons, the medium- companies also.
will retreat by bounds (uberschlagende Einsatz) .
Pioneers will-prevent pursuit, by motorised enema
forces by blocking roads 'and tracks .
94. _
If the 3xmoured' formation has .s the task of di sengagii'ig -
.our own-non-armoured forces, . it must repeatedly. attack. the
pursuing, enemy with strong close quarter assaults ; from unexpected
directions, till our ownn troops have withdrawn a good distance
from the enemy. Wide fronts of attack : are the .rule .
95 .
Breaking off action against superior enemy armoured
forces becomes easier when it is possibleto arrange strong
covering fire in rear and, if possible, a tank-proof position .
Active reconnaissance .to - the flanks and the timely,
detailing of forces, particularly of attached anti-tank troops
and pioneers, for flank protection, exe necessary to prevent
outflanking pursuit by the armotwed enemy .
a
If. it is not possible to - shake off the enemy, the
retreating armoured formation must take advantage of the ground
and . offavourable situations to attack -individual's larrants of the pursuing enemy with supariar forces .
96.
. Artificial foq facilitates disengagement' from -the -
anid conceals the direction of the withdrawal . .
A TION UNDER SPE IAL !NDTTIONN
Actioninfog.
97 .
In fog, armoured formations are formed up* .n a narrow
front"in depth. The form of deployment is -usually double file . Intervals and distances are sufficiently reduced to
maintain visual touch between the tanks.
98 .
it will usually prove advantageous to move the formation
.bX bounds .
In order not to lose direction,, the . deployed formation
will, .if possible, keep to tracks arx3d clearly visible ground
leading in the direction of the objective . The compass, bearing
of the' general .directicn' of the attack .is giveii by the battalion
to units .
99 .
In order to avoid sudden encounter with enemy A/T
.weapons, obstacles,, blocks or close-range , enemy .raids,
(particularly in case of sudden breaks in the fog) ; close range
reconnaissance and : observation 'are. of special importance . Motorcycle,
troops will usually maintain communication between formations
and take charge of immediate covering and . reconnaissar_ce duties .
When the' fog clears, distances and intervals must . quickly be
i.ncreased
Action in Built-up areassand Woods.
1
If the ai'uioured formation is compelled to 'fight in
built-up areas . and wo ode , the attack will be directed to
..outflanking the rear . or the deep flank . of .:.the -enemy. ' In front i
the enemy must be pinned, his centres of resistance being held or
blinded with smoke . The burning of houses will hasten success .
lose communication between the units which attack in the front
and those which 'carry out the outflanking movement is essential .
Large 'inhabited areas and woods must be taken' and
mopped up by sectors .
- 20 -
101.
When combing through larger. woods the battalion will . ,
adopt a narrow and deep formation . For this,, platoons of the"
I,, ;~ ;,t medium: cpmpany, are usually attached ; to the, light companies .
102 . The danger of sudden enemy attack - from close quartars
must be met-,-by increased reconnaissance and' covering fire from
tank to tank . Reconnaissance, observation an covering
operations immediately in front, flank and rear by the 11-i4it -
platoons anid often also by elements 'of the light. battalions are
therefore of particular importance .
A TION ]N' Mou1 rA1NS .
103 .
Action in mountains requires extremely,. 'careful previous
-groundreconnaissance . If possible, ; :the _ armoured formation will
follow the slopes and valleys, so that-the ` advance should not be
delayed by frequent crossing of gradients and : gorges .
Steepslopes hinder- the effect- `of tank .weapons.
overing fire therefore requires particular -control when
crossing deep gorges .
_ Deep valley roads withp:;resciipidtoeuss- _particularly
in the high mountains, afford no possibilitiess for. the employment'_
of armoured formations : Tanks can'aherefor- only be enraloyed
in small fighting groups I- often 'only -in the 'sti •eng-th:. of. a platoon .
Attachment to rifle or infantry formations is--therefor the rule .
The high speed .' of movement of -the'-:armoured`formations
involves the risk of , tanks unexpectedly-hitting, :mines laid by
the ene my.
The longer ; the- delay caused by . enc ouhte rig, mines , .
the more time will the enemy gain to :reinforce' . his" anti-tank
defences. or to concentrate on important-points .
Should, therefore, enemy' mines and' in particular' mine
fields be expected in the sector of attack of .; tahremoured
formation, it will be the chief task of the,,, light' . Platoons
`detailed. for observation and reconnaissance ~ to identify the
position' and size of enemy minefields in -time and .to-,forward an
early report .
It will be useful to attach some,pioneer scout
sections to the light platoons reconnoitering to the `front .
107 .
In order quickly to remove mines and . clear lanes
through minefields, the .tank pioneers at the disposal' of the
regiment will always be placed far forwardin'the'first wave and
attached to the leading armoured formation .-
-
1
I When having to cross country strewn .with`'mines it may .
be of advantage to disperse formations in width and depth .
Within the formation the tanks of the second and third line will
follow in the tracks of those of the first line . The same
applies to the formations of the rear waves .
1
-Minefields of major width and depth must be circumv9rited .
For this -, the timely sending out of observation and reconnaissance
patrols and -an early decision and subsequent order to divert, are
necessary. The regimental commander will decide "bother the
.original battle formation will be kept while circumventing . the
•
mine ' field or whether it-will have to be adapted to the enP!my
situation and the ground . He will report his decision_ .to his
superior commander and will re-establish the original battle
formation as soon as the enemy situationi,_ground and obstacles
permit.
11
If it ip not possible to circumvent the minefield
"movement must be halted and the formations must . take cover. "` !-'
lose reconnaissance will be intensified so as to 'provide
detailed information as to the - position _of. .the . mines and . the
extent of the minefield.
113 . Minefields are often only recognised after the foremost
tanks have already hit mines . In this . case , the tanks in
the mine field will be withdrawn . and recovered under the covering
fire of the rear units .
The - order for the withdrawal. of units which have
entered the minefield as well as the order for the halt and the
assembly of the formation will be given by the battalion or
regimental commander. .
114.
_ Self concealment of tanks by smoke, also the' firing. of
smoke shells by tanks and artillery detailed for covering fire
are effective aide in protection from enemy reconnaissance and
115.
116 .
A first task will be to find, out new openings for
action, to assure covering fire for the pioneers and to hold' ;
the formation ready so that it can form up quickly after lanes
have been created or the minefield has been removed.
Leaders of all ranks must themselves try_ at once to
-di$coyeri:aps .in the minefield or to. use their attached pioneers
to make lanes under the covering fire of tanks .-
fire when encountering mines . .
Detailed instructions for units' encountering mines
are' contained in hapter 5 of Divisional Order 470/6 .
The great number of vehicles in a. tank regiment
usually necessitates the forming of several billeting groups ;
advantage will be taken of habitations in areas affording cover'.
Billets must be camouflaged against ground and air
bbservation and must allow free movement in several direction
.iiUL iwimi u i l) .
118 .
119.
;;IP_, .in; .exceptional . cases the-tank re,giment .must itself.
provide protection for its billets against enemy ,land forces,
then '!t will employ elements . of the light, company reinforced .by
.odd tanks of--the medium companies 7 in such-a way that"
(a) -. by d9y ) they completely cover with fire from high
ground any area which the enemy might occupy ;
by night, they are able to cover the . approach roads by fire, themselves keeping close .-to the roads and
tracks .
Erectionofobstacles by the .,pioneer~platoonn and the attachment of motor cyclists are advisable,:
Quick inter. -communication between covarii5g troops and
resting troops must be assured.
Protection from enemy air attacks will be . --Iven by the
. A.A. platoons of the battalions . fe inforcament,.by M:G's of ;the
tank companies may be ordered, by the battalions
Although, while,'in-billets,,-.t ;, nk,regiment may be standi by to move 4' the roads and tracks_:leading .through the
billet ng area must always, ;be .,;kept. ;clear 4for,. ~th e, movements of
other formations .
Battalion..
- 22 -
Battle Transport will be, divided" i.nt,o'A. Echelon battle
transport (Gefechtstross I st) and B Echelon .battle transport .
(Gefechtstroes I1`) .
A Echelon battle transport must ; be"` kept, small. Its
composition, changes and must be adapted, to t're requirerrients of
the bat tle . The following may be long, t6.. A: Eche IonBattle
P.O.L. lorries ;
Ammunition lorries ;
Fitters' lorry for armourers ;
'Some of the reserve
Field kitchen .
During 'the march, A Echelonbattletransport will
remain in battle formationn
When deployment begins, it will .follow'`in' close
formation under a single leader in such a way that it car_ be
quickly brought up by a battalion before going into action in
order to relieve crews and for maintenance . purposes .
124 . -All remaining-vehicles of th3 battle transport will go
to B Echelon battle transport. It will be brought on_ in close
formation by the, regiment . Its movement is often controlled -by
the division .
125.
e.xperiencedLeaders of- A and B Echelon battle transport must be
and energetic officers .
126 .
During action, the maintenance groups form part of the
'fighting units . Their role 'is decided by the battalion
commander .
The commander of the maintenance 'groups, the battalion
.engineer, decides which vehicles will be sent to the Tank
Workshop ompany for repair . He is in intercommunication with
the : Battalion ommander and the regimental, engineer.
To the supply transport belong the ration vehicles of
Headquarters aryl of the ompanies ; they are commanded by the
Battalion .Messing Officer .
128'.
The baggage transport_ will be concentrated within the
battalion . It goes to .B Echelon 'battle transport when; not
moved under regimental cr- divisional orders .
- 23 -
129 . The Me4ioal Service is controlled by the battalion
medical officer .
Quick medical assistance, particularly in battle,
must be provided by a doctor accompanying the attack in an
armoured ambulance .
The setting up of the regimental aid post and the
evacuation of wounded to the main dressing station. are the task
of the second medical officer .
IX. SUPPLY.
Regiment•.
130.
The Regimental ommander must give particular
attention to maintaining his tanks ready for action . He has
a Workshop ompany for the repair of tanks .
131 .
The mad n task of .the Tank Workshop ompany is the
repair of tanks . In order to work effectively, the tank
workshop company must to a certain extent be stationary .
Movement by bounds is,' therefore, necessary to keep it working
in one place for several days . Its timely an appropriate
employment is decisive in the maintenance of the fighting
strength of the regiment .
132 .
If it does not follow behind A Echelon, the salvage
section must be brought up into position at an early opportunity.
134
- 24 -
Battalion.
133 .
The Battalion ommander .'is, responsible for the soppy}'
of his battalion.
Before going into action, the complete supply of the
tank battalion must' .be arranged. Battle :transport must be
divided accordingly (see paragraph 122) . n a march during
which no action is anticipated, P.O.L., lorries and some of the
field kitchens will be placed among the "companies. This will
reduce the time necessary for them to come into .action at the
end . of t.he march.
On long marches additional ; rual •W ill be carried
in A. F . Vs .
Refuelling will take place before going into action .
The spare fuel carried by. A .F.Vc will be .put into their'! tanks as`soon as an en~ounter-with the enemy seems likely. So
s not to jeopardise tfie orderly working . of .,the fuel supply,
empties must be taken back or, in case of .f4st movement, be .
dumped in- an orderly manner . The location of the dumps will;;
ba reported
At the end of or 'during pauses {n a : tle, ..the- troops
- must :be- PrashJ,y ..eupplied.
Rsitions1-,P i tipn-and ftzerl are
broughtupp, the wounded - are 'taken care; at and removed, the tank:;
evacuation service; must: . be, organised,
ting :strength. must
quickly be made up .
1.
FOWATIONS , AND MOVEMENTS OF THEBATTALION.
A. IQrmations .
One must distinguish between:
grillFormations,: "Battalion olumn", "Line . Ahead"
"Double : Line Ahead"
marchingFormationat
, "Line Ahead"- (also marching order)
and "Double Line Ahead" .
Battle Formations& "Arrowhead" and "Inverted Arrowhead" .
The intervals and distances given for these formations
are only rough indications . Touch within the Battalion
formation must never be lost .
2.'
Unless otheriaisa ordered, the right leading company is
responsible for direction and approach .
3 .'
It is only in Drill formations that tanks of . Battalion
Headquart3rs nsed keep their places,as shown below .
4.
"The Battalion olumn" is the usual drill formation
(see figure 1) . The companiea . are in company columns .
- 25 -
1 1,00M. %,
1<
moTe. : ots'cM4cES Awo 1MTaQ'4AL3 Aal', ot,4LY
APPENDIX l .
H
a.PPQox1MA.TF- .
5 .
Line ead is the' marching formation
Battalion on the road .
6.
Arrowhead is a suitable formation for the Battalion
to move in when deployed . . (See figure 2) .
Front of the Battalion
in arrowhead formation is approximately 500 metres) depth
approximately 1 9 800 metres .
- 26 -
APE IIX 1,. Leonti nu_qj
of the Tank
7. Inverted-Arrowhead- is the ' most `con iori =formation for the Battalion in the attack ., ;(See figure 3) .
In this case$ the
front , of the Battalion is approximately 1,000 metres and the depth
approximately 1,300 metres . The leading companies, are also . in
inverted arrowhead formation .
Unless otherwise ordered the right leading compan
gives direction and is the pivot for all changes .of formation
The rest march on it or deploy from at :
In Arrowhead or Inverted Arrowhead will' usually ,the :'next ompsn move up the right. If in` Inverted Arrowhead,; formation, it will move up= left of the ::forw'ard" company. ;s
is "inverted arrowhead left" .
In arrowhead formation the : third company will . mo
right while in inverted arrowhead formation' .it;;;will follow
the centre behind the leadirg company
In both arrowhead and inverted , arrowhea
c'.ompany willamove'-' in rearn. (See f3igurde 2
hanges must° be spsciplly ordered
B .MOVEMENT .
The movements of the Battalion will be' directed
wireless orders from °the Battalion commander': ::
Ths Battalion ommander transmits W/Torde re a ither to. all companies by collective mess
(using .the Battalion code -
nme) or : to individual companies (using compny code names) ..
if the Battalion ommander wishes a company to
acknowledge , he must ask. the company to' do so ; ; (for . further
information see D613/12) ;.
II . Wheeled Vehicles .
U.
Formations for the wheeled vehicles of the B.•- tta'lion
are laid down in M.T. Training Instructions (Divipional Orders' 472) .
12 .
If they are not employed for special purposes, wheeled
vehicles of the Battalion will usually march in : cure -or more groupg .
- 27 -
APPENDIX 2 .
MAR H TABLE, DENSITY and SPEED of the TANK BATTALION and
TANK REGIMENT .
1,400
----------------
----------------
2 1 200
55,,006600
3,880
14,000
8. 1 380
17 ,
45 ; :
34
7,500
5,800
17 ,O XO
12,500
Unit .
.Battalion .
Includirg B. Echelon
B.attle-Transport
------------ --------------
Battle ' Transport .
--------------------------
Without B . Echelon
Battle Transport .
10 - 1.5 Min.
30
The length of Units when halting under war tirrr. conditions
is the same as at 25 km.p .h.
Forming up .times : (On favourable ground) .
Battalion:
Fran marching column to Battalion inverted arrowhead
10 - 15 Min .
From Battalion olumn to Battalion Inverted . arrowhead
5 - 10 Min.
Regiment :
From Marching olumn to Action in Waves
20 25 Min.
to action by wings
25 - 30 Min.
From Battalion olumn
Extended at the 15 km. P . 25
Halt. Me tre s . Min Me tres . Minutes .
Battalion without
B . Echelon ;Battle
Tr ansp ort .
1,000
Regiment .
Includirg B. Echelon 3,000
APPENDIX 3 .
- 28 -
TAE--BASI LINE. OF_ ADVAN E (Stosslinie) .
The giving of map references by means of the basic line of
advance serves for the transmission of orders, the_ forwarding of
reports and the control of artillery fire .
Two" points on the . _map (if possible church spires) in tla
field of movement of the division will b e indicated by Division and
connected by a line on thie map ; this line must lie in the direction
of the attack . The line will be divided in centimetres, . with the
zero point approximately at the height of the starting point of 'the
Division.
The map reference of 'a certain point (objective)" is* arrived"
at : by drawing a vertical from it to the basic line of advance .
"
int and'the basic
t bf 9 (9 c m . , from ,`,
its I right wi11- be
The situation o f the 'point is' .determined
(a) -: The distance between the .,'zero point-on- the'.basic line o
advance and the point::'on which;it.-id, hit -by;:the . vertical :
By the vertical :distance be tween< the p
line o.f,-ad"vance
Example : A locality situated at: a .-h
zero) . of the basic line of advance and 2.7=:`c-m.: t
rsferrcd'to in W/Vmessages with "9 RIGHT ..2.7" .
The reading will always be' in . ceutimetres whatever the scale
of the' map may be
So as-' .to make W/T" inter ceptiom'.by the enemy - more .difficult
Division will, on different days, order the origin of th3 basic line
.of advance to be referred to NOT. as zero but as another number .
Should-the Division switch -off at an angle, the switching off pointt
on the basic 'line of advance will get a new reference number ;' this :'
also will make interception more difficult .
FIG 2 . - THE'
s
OATTAL.ION IN ARt .OWKE.^o
. OY 0QUILL u+w. AiALa
too ,"%.
Q o<n,o Mc
u~
~aa• . o, t y APPQ.O IMAT6
FtG. 3 .
THE eATYAWON IN IMVEGtTE.D AQQOWNF,AO. FOQr4ATIOK
. is.450m. 4, (
,4 . wsom. w+
coY.
QT
sso 0
GOY.
360. LIl4[. .
Foar4 TtOt -
Dt3TAKG4a A. iNT>LQVIJ ARt Q"W APPQO%bMk-V. .
APPENDIX A-
•
DIAGRAM SHOWING 3UPPLtE5
AMMUt4iTION . FUEL, RAT%ON5, Ftii•L.D P05T OFFi GE.
~~ E.MPTYp
(b)
RESTIhyG :, P~.A. E. ~
A O MOOATION
OF THE
1+ANV. bATTAuor4
TQAK5POQTS TNI~t:. : .
(a.) 1 OLUMt4(•A . H4LLON
TO AMMUNITION I33UING PLA L
PA KING MATLI IHI~
Ro-r ,ANTI'O (AUzGt:AAUTt) 3PAAL
PARTS ANO U.5, MATtRtAL .
TO FuiLL tS5UINa PLA E.
EMPTY GAN(5TLRS .
RATION TRAKSPOQT
OUTGOING MAIL .
PA utiAG MA1 LQIAL.
DIAGQAM 5HOwsNG THE ALLO ATION OF THE
MAINTENAN E SE,RVI E.3
A .F Js, M.'F:, 3PAtlE PAQT3 -
- EINTQAL LINd -
L TANtL P.E.GT.
I
i AATTALtON
I PLATOON
eu LIZ.
MA04TEMAI~G1. GQuUP
~tA%M 4A 4GE GitouP 1 O '.
M 4HT g.NAK
E G QIUO
(~O9ATTALION ElIGIKE J
.G. ALt- ~'M~
G ROuP~ . 1'I/WG
APPENDIX 5.
T4zoo P,
a&GTL. GK f Ke%IKfi-®.Q
IALVA4tL atc-rioK
~- TAPtt4 wpQ1 lMOP crnt'.
(WITHOUT SAt.vAawL o"Tt4"4)