KASSERINE PASS
BATTLES
Doctrines and Lessons Learned
Volume II, Part 2
U.S. ARMY
CENTER OF MILITARY HISTORY
Contents
5. FM 17-22, Armored Force Field Manual: Reconnaissance Battalion
(Extract), 1942
6. FM 17-30, Armored Force Field Manual: Tank Platoon (Extract),
1942
7. FM 17-32, Armored Force Field Manual : The Tank Company, Light
and Medium (Extract), 1942
8 . FM 17-33, Armored Force Field Manual: The Armored Battalion,
Light and Medium (Extract), 1942
5
FM 17-22, Armored Force Field Manual : Reconnaissance
Battalion (Extract), 1942
WAR DEPARTMENT,
WASHINGTON, August 18, 1942 .
FM 17-22, Armored Force Field Manual, Reconnaissance
Battalion, is published for the information and guidance
of all concerned .
[A . G . 062 .11 (7-14-42) .]
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR :
G. C. MARSHALL,
Chief of Staff .
OFFICIAL :
J . A . ULIO,
Major General,
The Adjutant General.
DISTRIBUTION:
D 2, 7 (5) ; D 17 (20) ; IR 2, 5, 7, 8 (5) ; Bn and H 17
(10) ; IBn 2,5-10 (3) ; C 17 (5) ; IC 2,5-11 (3) .
(For explanation of symbols see FM 21-6 .)
II
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I . General, Paragraph Page
Purpose 1
1
Mission 2
1
Support 3
2
Organization 4
2
Method of employment 5
2
II . Training .
General 6
3
Procedure 7
3
III . Control, orders, liaison .
Control 8
4
Orders 9
9
Liaison 10
10
IV . Maintenance,
General 11
11
Battalion maintenance platoon-_-_
12
11
Maintenance plan 13
11
V. Evacuation .
General 14
12
Battalion medical detachment____
15
12
Plan for employment of battalion
medical detachment 16
13
VI . Marches and security .
General 17
17
March procedure 18
17
March security 19
21
Security at the halt 20
27 Security in bivouac 21
31
VII:" Information and reports .
General 22
32
Information sought 23
32
Collecting and recording information
24
33
Transmittal of Information 25
33
VIII . Offensive combat .
General 26
33
Advance to contact 27
33
Cooperation with regimental reconnaissance
28
37 Action In a penetration 29
39 Envelopment 30
39 Seizing critical areas 31
39 Pursuit 32
39 IX, Defensive action and retrograde movements
.
G=-neral 33
41
Counterreconnaissance 34
41
Defense of a position 35
41
Retrograde 36
41 X. Special operations .
Attack of a river line 37
42 Defense of a river line 38
46 Operations in' jungle 39
47 Desert warfare 46
51
III
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
SECTION I
GENERAL
E 1 . PURPOSE.-a. The purpose of this manual is to outline
general methods of training and employing the reconnaissance
battalion of the armored division . Tactical employment
of the reconnaissance company is covered in
FM 17-20, and that of the tank company In FM 17-32 . The
subject of reconnaissance in general is covered in FM 100-5
and FM 17-10 .
b. This manual is intended as a guide only . It is not
expected that it will be followed blindly . Rigid application
of a fixed set of rules is liighly undesirable . Each situation
must be solved on its own merits . Individual initiative must
be encouraged .
c . Following is a key to symbols used in illustrations in this
manual
CAR, HALF TRACK
GUN, ASSAULT, SELF -PROPELLED
CZCAR, ARMORED, RECONNAISSANCE
0 TRUCK,' q TON
4 MOTORCYCLE, SOLO
O TANK
COMBAT COMD, ARMD DIV
∎ 2. MIssIoN .-a. The primary mission of the reconnaissance
battalion is, In conjunction with observation aviation,
to furnish the division commander with Information upon
which to base a decision for employment of the division .
1
FM 17-22
1-2
2 -5
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Before any other mission is assigned, a careful estimate
should be made as to the probable effect on this primary
mission.
b . Additional missions that may be assigned are counterreconnaissance,
security, and combat. The reconnaissance
battalion is not given the mission of covering development
of the division or its elements, Such mission would interfere
seriously with the primary mission of reconnaissance . Such
covering is incidental to reconnaissance and counterreconnaissance
.
∎ 3, SUPPORT, a. Depending upon its mission, terrain, width
of zone, and the enemy situation, the reconnaissance battalion
may be reinforced by engineers, infantry, artillery,
tank destroyers, and air bombardment . Observation aviation
attached to an armored division habitually cooperates
with the reconnaissance battalion .
b . When numerous streams are to be crossed and the terrain
is otherwise difficult, one or more companies of engineers
should be attached,
c. When the battalion is given counterreconnaissance, security,
or combat missions, infantry and artillery may be
attached. Combat aviation if available, should be in support .
d, When the reconnaissance battalion is given a mission
of seizing and holding critical points it should be relieved at
the earliest practicable moment by other troops in order
that it may perform its primary mission of reconnaissance .
∎ 4 . ORGANIZATION.-The battalion is composed of a battalion
headquarters and headquarters company, three reconnaissance
companies, and a tank company . For details of
organization see current Tables of Organization .
8 5. METHOD OF EMPLOYMENT .-a, The reconnaissance battalion
operates under direct orders of the division commander .
Rarely will it or any of its elements be attached to other
units of the division, as this will dissipate its strength .
b. Clearly defined missions must be assigned. If two or
more missions are assigned, the primary mission must be
indicated .
c. A zone of reconnaissance is assigned . This varies with
the terrain, road net, mission, and enemy situation . A zone
2
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
5-7
30 to 50 miles in width may be reconnoitered at a speed of
10 to 15 miles per hour. (See FM 17-10 and FM 17-20 .)
d. The battalion may reconnoiter as far as 150 miles in
front of the division . This distance, however, will be exceptional
. Normally the reconnaissance battalion will not precede
the division by more than 100 miles,
SECTION II
TRAINING
8 6. GENERAL.-a. Tactical training of the battalion as a
whole commences near the end of the company training
period. The company should have completed each phase of
training as listed below before such phase is scheduled for
battalion training . During company training periods the
battalion commander and his staff, in addition to supervising
training, prepare tactical exercises for the battalion .
Battalion headquarters should hold frequent command post
exercises . Combined operations with other units, air, infantry,
tank, artillery, tank destroyer, and engineer, should be
held when practicable .
b . The battalion as a whole, in addition to company training
(see FM 17-20), should be trained in-
Marches.
Security .
Collection of information and reports .
Offensive action .
Defensive action,
Retrograde movements .
Special operations .
E 7. PROCEDURE .-a . To be of value in training, exercises must
be carefully planned and vigorously executed . Plans for an
exercise must be made well in advance and not left to the
last moment . (See FM 21-5 .)
b . The following is a guide to steps taken in preparation
of field exercises :
(1) Decide upon the type of exercise (par . 6) and the particular
points of such exercise that are to be emphasized .
(2) Make a map reconnaissance to determine suitable
terrain for the exercise and find out if that terrain is available
at the time desired .
3
7-8
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
(3) Plan the exercise on the map. Make a terrain reconnaissance
of the area . Next, with the staff, war-game the
exercise on the map until satisfied that the situation is sound
and that the points to be emphasized will be brought out .
(4) The exercise should then be played as a war game
by the battalion commander, his staff, and the company
officers. At this time company commanders and, junior
officers should be required to' make decisions and issue orders .
Interest is maintained by injecting various small situations
requiring immediate decision and action .
(5) The exercise is next played on the terrain . Before
proceeding in the exercise, make sure that all equipment
and personnel are complete as far as available. From the
time the unit moves from the vehicle park until the end of
the problem, each individual must understand that he is to
act as though he were under actual combat conditions . Toleration
of any laxity will invariably lead to poor performance
in the exercise and a consequent loss in training time .
(6) After the exercise, hold a critique at which the exercise
is explained. Bring out the good and bad points of performance
. Where solutions were in error point out a correct
solution . Do not try to hold to one solution if others may
be equally good. Care must be taken not to ridicule the work
of individuals .
c . In all problems try to inject realism . Whenever possible
use a two-sided maneuver . In any case outline the enemy
position with small groups,
SECTION III
CONTROL, ORDERS, LIAISON
>t 6 . CONTROL.-Control is exercised by giving definite orders,
by use of radio and messengers, and by use of zones, boundaries,
axis of advance, and phase lines .
(t . Radio,-(1) The battalion is amply equipped with long
and short range radio sets for communication within the
battalion, to higher headquarters, and with supporting air
units .
(2) When voice radio is used, and it is used for all short
distance radio communication, the commander or his staff
4
CE~2RCN
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
8
officers must use it in person . For long range operation,
messages are sent by key and usually in code .
(3) Figure 1 shows the battalion radio net . By use of
different crystals these nets may be changed to meet any
situation .
F5
FIGURE 1 .-Radio nets, reconnaissance battalion .
(4) Strict radio discipline must be maintained . Messages
must be brief .
(5) For radio identification codes see current Signal
Operations Instructions . FM 17-20 also covers radio Identification
codes,
(6) Do not send orders or information in the clear when the
information to be transmitted, if intercepted by the enemy,
474172'--42-2
5
AoRCN
a
FIGURE -Airplane message pick-up field . Do not place pick-up field near the CP ; the enemy may find it .
FIGURE 3 -Airplane message pick-up field . Place pick-up field away from CP and use messenger to
take message to panel personnel .
Go
DO
8 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 4 .-Zone of advance for reconnaissance battalion, showing
boundaries, axis of advance, and phase lines A, B, C, and D .
8
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
8-9
can be acted upon in time to influence the situation in question.
Do not send messages in code and repeat any part
in the clear, Brevity codes may be used for certain messages
. For rules governing radioo security, see FM 24-5 .
b. Messengers .-Use messengers for short distances, as
they will be faster than radio, There are only a few messengers
in the battalion headquarters, so use them sparingly.
A messenger sent to division headquarters 50 miles
away will probably not return within 4 hours .
c . Panels and pick-up and drop messages .-(1) The use
of pick-up and drop messages is convenient for transmission
of overlays, maps, and aerial photographs . The slowflying
liaison airplane is valuable for this service . Do not
have the pick-up field near the CP. The enemy observation
may find it . For use of panels see FM 24-5 .
(2) When radio silence is essential, when radio communication
has broken down, or when it is necessary to identify
location of the CP or pick-up field to the air observer, panels
may he used .
d. Zones, boundaries, axis of advance .-Direction and lateral
extent of movement is controlled by designation of zones
of advance and boundaries, or by giving an axis of advance
and a frontage . The division commander designates a zone
for the battalion . The battalion commander divides the zone
into zones for his companies . (See fig . 4 .)
e. Phase lines .-The rate of advance is controlled and coordination
is obtained by designating phase lines and report
lines. These are easily identified terrain features on
the route of advance . The battalion commander prescribes
the time leading elements of the companies will pass the
phase lines . Companies report when they reach and pass
a phase line .
1 9. ORDERS.-a. Orders are usually oral. They may be, and
usually are, supplemented by use of marked maps, overlays,
or aerial photographs . A sketch such as figure 4 might well
be issued as part of the order for an advance . Orders follow
the form given in FM 101-5 . They must be short and clear .
Missions must be unmistakably stated,
b. Clear orders are necessary for correct execution. Every
officer must strive by continuous practice to make himself
9
9-10
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
perfect in the issuance of such orders . Thorough training
in this subject should be given during the war game period
of preparing tactical problems .
E 10 . LIAIsoN.-a. The use of liaison officers must be habitual .
Reconnaissance battalion headquarters has one liaison officer
who remains at division headquarters . This officer must
know the plans of the battalion commander . He must keep
the battalion commander informed of any changes in division
plans . His duties are prescribed in FM 101-5 .
b. Each combat command sends one liaison officer to the
CP of the reconnaissance battalion . This officer must know
the plans of the combat command commander . He keeps this
commander informed on the situation as found by the reconnaissance
battalion . He should have a radio set for communication
with the combat command and should also be
provided with messengers .
c. The reconnaissance company of the armored regiments
should maintain liaison personnel at the CP of the reconnaissance
battalion . This also applies to the infantry regiment
when it is leading the division . As the combat com=
mand closes on the reconnaissance battalion, its liaison party
joins that company of the reconnaissance battalion in the
zone of advance of the combat command. When the regimental
reconnaissance company operating with the combat
command closes on the reconnaissance battalion, the liaison
party joins the company commander and furnishes him all
information available .
d. Artillery liaison officers from the combat commands
should also join the reconnaissance battalion and remain with
it until the combat command closes on the reconnaissance
battalion. By this means the artillery will gain early information
of positions, terrain, and targets . The liaison officer
is also able to give necessary information to any supporting
artillery that may be detailed to assist the reconnaissance
battalion .
e. The engineer reconnaissance platoon of the headquarters
company, engineer battalion, accompanies the reconnaissance
battalion . It performs reconnaissance and liaison
functions .
1 0
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
11-13
SECTION IV
MAINTENANCE
0 11, GENERAL,Each company of the reconnaissance battalion
has a maintenance section which performs second
echelon maintenance for the company . In addition, the
battalion headquarters company has a maintenance platoon
which performs second echelon maintenance for the battalion
as a whole . The battalion may be reinforced by elements of
the division maintenance battalion . In combat the distinction
between echelons of maintenance is slight, Each maintenance
unit does such work, with the tools, spare parts, and
mechanics available, as time and the tactical situation permit.
Company maintenance will not undertake work so
extensive that service to a large number of other vehicles
is prevented . Vehicles must be kept r olling. FM 17-50 covers
in general the subject of maintenance,
12 . BATTALION MAINTENANCE PLATOON This platoon is organized
into a platoon headquarters, two maintenance sections,
a maintenance section (trains), and a wrecker section .
When the battalion is advancing, with two companies leading,
a maintenance section is assigned to each of the two
leading companies. When three reconnaissance companies
are leading, the train section will service the center company .
1 13 . MAINTENANCE PLAN.-a. Before starting an operation,
the battalion commander, after acquainting his staff with
plans for employment of the battalion, calls upon the maintenance
officer for a plan of maintenance . The plan is based
upon a maintenance estimate of the situation which
includes-
(1) Probable enemy resistance.-If enemy resistance is expected
to be heavy, maintenance needs will be high . If resistance
is expected to be light, maintenance needs will
probably be low .
(2) Terrain,Rough terrain will increase maintenance
needs .
(3) Width of zone.-If the zone of advance is wide, the
work of maintenance detachments will be made difficult,
owing to the long distances which they must travel to reach
disabled vehicles .
11
21-23
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
some protection from the enemy . However, the battalion
must provide for its own security . The reserve reconnaissance
company furnishes the outpost .
b. Security in bivouac is obtained by-
(1) Taking advantage of natural barriers such as wide
streams, swamps, lakes, or extremely mountainous country .
(2) Detail of an outpost, (See FM 17-10 and FM 17-20 .)
c. When practicable, select bivouac in daylight, move billeting
parties in and occupy bivouac after dark; the enemy
may observe these movements in daylight .
d . Make sure a definite system of recognition is in effect.
Supply vehicles, kitchens, vehicles for evacuation of wounded,
and messengers will be moving in and out all night. (See
FM 17-20.)
e, Security from air attack is obtained by concealment,
dispersion, and use of available weapons . Do not fire at hostile
airplanes unless attacked or unless sure your location has
already been discovered, as, this will disclose your position .
Dig slit trenches for protection .
SECTION VII
INFORMATION AND REPORTS
• 22 . GENERAL. Information, no matter how accurate, is
useless if not placed in the hands of the commander in time
to be evaluated . Therefore, there must be a systematic and
fast method of recording information and transmitting it
to division CP.
• 23. INFORMATION SOUGHT .-All information which may be
of any value to the commander must be sought and reported.
FM 17-10 lists specific items of information which should be
obtained . In general, information required isa
. Location of the enemy, his flanks, disposition, composition,
direction of movement, strength .
b. Location of gaps or weak points In enemy defense .
c . Confirmation of information obtained by air observation,
d. Identifications .
e. Terrain, such as obstacles, cover, concealment, ground
suitable for tanks, ground suitable for dismounted men only,
impassable ground.
3 2
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
24-27
• 24. COLLECTING AND RECORDING INFORMATION .-Collection
and transmission of information by reconnaissance companies,
is covered in FM 17-20 . At reconnaissance battalion
headquarters, information is recorded and evaluated to some
extent . However, information which may appear of little
or no value may be of great value to the division G-2 when
evaluated in conjunction with information received from
other sources .
• 25. TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION,-The division G-2 may
designate which information is to be transmitted at once
and which is to be sent in periodic reports . This may be
covered in standing operating procedure . Should this not
be indicated, then the battalion commander must decide .
Usually information of first contact with the enemy, any
large body of troops encountered, and any terrain information
which is vital to the division commander in his plan of
employment is transmitted at once . For methods of transmitting
information, see paragraph 8 .
SECTION VIII
OFFENSIVE COMBAT
126. GENERAL.-Offensive combat in general is covered in
FM 100-5. To gain information, the reconnaissance battalion
must act quickly and aggressively . It must be prepared to
fight for information . In addition to the armored cars, it
has a tank company which it may use to overcome enemy
counterreconnaissance or to repel an enemy attack.
•
27. ADVANCE TO CONTACT,--a. Zones, boundaries, axis of
advance, and phase lines are covered in paragraph 8 .
b. As the battalion advances in its zone, increasing enemy
resistance usually is met. Reconnaissance companies spread
out and seek the enemy's flanks and rear, constantly reporting
the situation to the battalion headquarters .
c. When the hostile covering force can be penetrated, the
reconnaissance elements feel out and determine the enemy
dispositions. They seek weak spots in the enemy defenses .
The reserve reconnaissance company may be committed to
move around the enemy flanks to his rear areas .
33
27 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 20 .-Reconnaissance elements seek location of enemy flanks
and move to his rear, if practicable . Battalion commander must
watch road net so he can shift his reserve .
34
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
35
27
27
(3)WHEN PENETRAT!ONJS
COMPLETED RCN , 8N
PASSES THROUGH
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 22 .-When passed through in a penetration, the battalion
reorganizes and follows the last echelon of attack,
3 6 '
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
27-28
d. When the enemy flanks are unassailable and his covering
forces cannot be penetrated by reconnaissance elements, a
weak place in the covering force is sought . The reconnaissance
battalion commander then attacks through this weak
spot with his tank company, supported by air bombardment
and artillery, if available . Available assault guns of the
reserve reconnaissance company and of reconnaissance platoons
near the point of attempted penetration support the
tank company attack . The reserve reconnaissance company
moves through behind the tank company and proceeds to
feel out the enemy main defenses. The tank company seeks
to destroy the covering forces, thus permitting other reconnaissance
elements to advance .
∎ 28. COOPERATION WITn REGIMENTAL RECONNAISSANCE .-AS
combat commands close on the reconnaissance battalion,
liaison details from regimental reconnaissance companies join
their reconnaissance units . These units make detailed terrain
reconnaissance and contact elements of the reconnaissance
battalion in their zone . They may relieve elements
of the -reconnaissance battalion, thus permitting the battalion
to extend reconnaissance farther to the flanks . How-
FIGURE 23,-Operation when exploiting a penetration made by
other troops,
37
28 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 24. Envelopment .
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
28-32
ever, such maneuver usually is impractical, and regimental
reconnaissance companies may move to the flanks or be
placed in division reserve . When the reconnaissance battalion
is employed over a large front, regimental reconnaissance
companies may take over part of the front .
• 29, ACTION IN A PENETRATION,-a . When passed through by
assaulting troops, the battalion is reorganized and follows
the last echelon of attack, ready to move out on reconnaissance
missions when the penetration has been made .
b . When the division passes through a gap in the hostile
line to exploit a penetration made by other troops, the reconnaissance
battalion leads .
• 30. ENVELOPMENT,-a . When the division attacks by envelopment
of one flank, the bulk of the reconnaissance battalion
reconnoiters on the exposed flank and seeks enemy vital
installations .
b . When the division attacks by double envelopment, the
battalion operates on both flanks .
• 31, SEIZING CRITICAL AREAS .In offense, the reconnaissance
battalion may be given the mission of seizing and holding a
critical area until the arrival of other troops . It may be given
the mission of moving forward rapidly to assist paratroops
in holding such areas . The battalion moves swiftly to these
areas, fighting to obtain them if necessary . It must be relieved
as soon as practicable .
132, PURSUIT.When the division engages in a pursuit, the
reconnaissance battalion operates with the encircling force .
It gains contact with the retreating columns ; operates on their
flanks : locates routes that will permit reaching the heads of
these enemy columns ; finds and reports on routes that will
enable the encircling force to avoid obstacles and hostile
security elements; and locates key positions from which the
encircling force may operate against the heads of the retreating
enemy columns, and thus facilitate the destruction of the
enemy by the direct pressure forces . This reconnaissance
during a pursuit must be pushed with great vigor, (See also
FM 100-5.)
32 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
40
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
33-36
SECTION IX
DEFENSIVE ACTION AND RETROGRADE MOVEMENTS
133, GENERAL .-In defense, the primary mission of the battalion
is to detect the strength and direction of movement of
the enemy . As the enemy approaches, the battalion may be
assigned a counterreconnaissance mission.
• 34 . COUNTERRECONNAISSANCE The width of the counterreconnaissance
zone will vary with the terrain and the road
net. Normally no more than nine roads can be covered . For
counterreconnaissance missions the regimental reconnaissance
companies and one or more light tank companies may
be attached to the reconnaissance battalion .
. 35. DEFENSE OF A POSITION,-When the division is engaged
in defending a position, the reconnaissance battalion, reinforced
as necessary, contacts the enemy, reports his strength
and movements, and performs counterreconnaissance missions.
It may fight a delaying action to give the defenders
time to organize positions . It withdraws along previously
reconnoitered routes . It seeks to lead the enemy into a false
conception of the defensive position, and deceives him as to
its extent and strength . For this mission the battalion may
be reinforced with artillery . It is reinforced with engineers
for performing demolition work . The battalion then reconnoiters
to the flanks and prepares to resume the offensive or
to protect a withdrawal,
136. RETROGRADE In a retrograde movement, the reconnaissance
battalion operates on the hostile flanks to establish
road blocks, and to locate, harass, and delay hostile pursuing
forces, Withdrawal must be effected before becoming too
closely engaged . The delaying force must be kept constantly
informed of the progress of the hostile troops . Contact is
maintained and enemy progress reported by elements of reconnaissance
companies observing the hostile route of march
from positions along the flanks . These detachments harass
the enemy by firing into the flank of the hostile force and
quickly retiring to other points of observation . During a
retrograde movement, there will be frequent opportunities
41
36-37
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
for elements of the reconnaissance battalion to prepare well .
planned ambushes into which enemy troops, especially security
groups, can be drawn and then annihilated. The tank
company may be used with the delaying force, or may move on
routes parallel to the hostile route, prepared to crush enemy
security forces or other small groups . Unit commanders will
ordinarily be given mission type orders in an action of this
nature . Every means of communication will be used to effect
coordination and control . Air cooperation is invaluable in
maintaining hostile and friendly contact and In reporting
targets of opportunity . This cooperation is not restricted
to observation aviation but envisages the utmost use of combat
aviation to operate against the heads of enemy columns
and reconnaissance elements .
hl
ENEMY
OWN TROOPS' I
Y
RC N lol
RCN UNITS RECONNOITER
ON FLANKS
RCN
42
toRONENEMY
w
OWN TROOPS I
lol
AS DIVISION WITHDRAWS RON
ON CLOSES IN BEHIND IT
RCN
FIGURE 26.-Withdrawal .
SECTION X
SPECIAL OPERATIONS
1 37. ATTACK OF A RIVER LINE.-a. The fundamental principles
governing attack of a river line are covered in FM
100-5 and FM 17-10 .
RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION 37
FrauRE 27 .-Delaying action. Select position where weapons may
be used from defilade . Select next position that will cover withdrawal
from forward position . Use tanks to counterattack .
Engineers destroy bridges and place mines .
43
6
FM 17-30, Armored Force Field Manual: Tank
Platoon (Extract), 1942
WAR DEPARTMENT,
WASHINGTON, October 22,1942 .
FM 17-30, Armored Force Field Manual, Tank Platoon, is
published for the information and guidance of all concerned .
II
[A . G . 062 .11 (9-18-42) .]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraphs Page
CHAPTER 1 . General
BY ------------------------------ 1-4 1 ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR : CHAPTER 2 . Trainir.g,
G. C. MARSHALL, SECTION I . General 5-5 6
II. Terrain
Chief of Staff . -------------------------- 7-8 8
III, Weapons and ammunition 9-11 30
OFFICIAL : CHAPTER 3 . Control, orders, and reconnaissance_ ._ 12-14 54
J . A . ULIO, CHAPTER 4 . Marches 15-18 59
CHAPTER 5 . Security 19-29 70 Major General,
The Adjutant General .
CHAPTER 6 . Offensive action,
SECTION I . General 30-32 121
DISTRIBUTION : II. Tank crew 33-35 ,;125 7 III. Tank platoon 38-42 135
D 2, 7 (5), 17 (20) ; Bn and H 17 (10) ; IBn 2,.5-10 (3) ; f CHAPTER 7 . Defense 43-45 156
C 17 (20) ; IC 2, 5-11 (5) . INDEX 159
(For explanation of symbols see FM 21-6 .) i III
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
TANK PLATOON
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
• 1 . PURPOSE AND SCOPE.-a. This manual is written as a
guide for the tactical training and combat procedure for
the individual tank, the tank section, and the tank platoon,
both light and medium . The tactical procedures and methods
set forth herein are not to be followed as inflexible rules,
as such practice would stifle individual initiative . The
methods of procedure given must be varied to meet the particular
situation at hand,
b. Key to symbols used in this manual will be found on
page 2.
• 2. ORCANIZATroN .-The tank platoon, both light and medium,
consists of five tanks . The platoon is divided into
a platoon headquarters consisting of the platoon leader and
the crew of his tank, and two sections of two tanks each,
• 3 . CHARACTERISTICS, a . The tank is characterized by great
mobility, fire power, armor protection, and shock action .
These characteristics are possessed in varying degree by different
types of tanks. The characteristics dictate the manner
of employment . All types of tanks are limited by their
restricting vision devices.
b. Light tanks, as compared to medium tanks, have less
fire power, lighter armor and armament, greater speed, and
better maneuverability . They are particularly fitted for-
(1) Feeling out and developing weak spots in the enemy
position through which medium tanks may attack .
(2) Screening the advance against light enemy resistance.
(3) Leading an attack against an unarmored enemy weak
in antitank defense, when speed is essential .
(4) A fast maneuvering force to exploit the success of other
tanks .
(5) Maneuver to flank or rear to strike the enemy command
posts, communication centers, reserves, and vital
installations .
FM 17-30
1
3
0 OBSERVATION POST
0 RIFLEMAN
~C RIFLEMAN (OUT OF
ACTION)
--lb- LIGHT MACHINE GUN
0120- CAL 50 MACHINE GUN
HANTITANK GUN
0-0 MOTORCYCLE
SCOUT CAR
O TANK IN MOTION
TANK IN POSITION
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
<5 TANK SECTION LEADER
TANK PLATOON COMDR
A
MORTAR CARRIER
2
ASSAULT GUN (SELF
PROPELLED)
ll AMMUNITION CARRIER
OBSTACLE
BUNKER
EXPLOSIVE SHELL
FIRE
SMOKE SHELL FIRE
-LD--LINE OF DEPARTURE
(6) Pursuing a defeated enemy .
c . Medium tanks, because of their greater fire power, guns
of heavier caliber, increased armor protection, and shocking
power are used to-
(1) Lead an attack against an enemy whose position and
strength are known .
TANK PLATOON
3-4
(2) Support by fire the attack of either light or medium
tanks .
d. It is essential that tank crew members know the strength
and weaknesses of their tank and its weapons . Furthermore,
they must know the strength of their weapons as compared
to enemy weapons likely to be encountered.
14. OPERATION .-The tank platoon is the smallest tank battle
unit . It normally operates as part of the tank company .
However, it may operate as an independent unit as advance,
flank, or rear guard or on similar missions .
a. Methods.-Tanks operate by surprise, fire and maneuver,
and in mass. The violation of these fundamentals will
lead to ineffectual effort and perhaps disaster .
(1) .Surprise.-Surprise is gained by striking the enemy
at an unexpected time, from an unexpected direction, with
all strength possible. Speed of movement, use of covered
approaches, and coordination of fires assist in gaining surprise
. Seek to surprise the enemy but do not let yourself
be surprised . Give the enemy credit for being as capable
as yourself. Do not underestimate his ability . Do not become
careless. Expect the unexpected and be prepared for it .
(2) Fire and maneuver.-An advancing unit is covered by
the fl re of weapons in stationary position. This is important
as the tank in the open is not only extremely vulnerable
but movement, dust, and restricted vision make the locating
of new targets extremely difficult. Tanks in defiladed position
can quickly locate and promptly bring fire upon hostile
weapons that fire upon the advancing tanks . This procedure
of fire and movement may be by section, platoon, or company.
(3) Mass .-Concentrate effort . Do not waste strength on
numerous unimportant targets . Strike on a key position with
all power that can be mustered. If this falls, others may
then be taken . If effort is made on several positions, the
enemy may easily destroy you by concentrating successively
on each attacking element .
b. Coordination .-Coordination of effort, that is, timing of
all elements, is essential . An uncoordinated effort violates
the fundamental of the use of mass . Therefore, in attack,
time the movement of the tanks and the opening of fire by
4 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
supporting weapons or supporting tanks so that maximum
effect is obtained . Teamwork is essential .
c . Initiative and aggressiveness.-In order to obtain success
in battle, leaders must exercise initiative and act aggressively .
A small force acting under direction of an aggressive, alert,
leader can overcome a much larger force whose leader is slow
and nonaggressive. Do not let the enemy have time to get
set . Conversely, do not rush headlong into battle with no
plan of action . Think clearly, give clear orders, then act
fast .
d . Striking weakness .-Seek to strike the enemy where he
is weak in antitank defense. Do not drive headlong against
strong antitank defense. Bypass it or call for assistance to
reduce it .
e. Mission and echelons of attack(1) The mission of
tanks in the armored division is to attack and destroy vital
hostile installations such as command posts, communication
centers, supply installations, reserves, and artillery.
(2) The mission of tanks in the separate tank battalions
is to assist infantry, cavalry, or motorized divisions to advance
by destroying hostile machine guns, personnel, arid vital
installations .
(3) A tank attack will usually be launched in three echelons,
each echelon in a series of waves . ,
(a) The first echelon of attack, preceded by neutralization
by combat aviation and artillery, if available, is directed
against the antitank defenses, artillery, command posts, and
other rear installations . (See FM 17-33 and FM 17-32.)
Tank, platoons of this echelon destroy first the enemy antitank
defenses and second, enemy artillery. They attack
enemy infantry only when hindered by it in fulfilling their
primary missions .
(b) The platoons of the second echelon follow the first
echelon at such distance that the enemy will not have time
to re-form his antitank defenses, These platoons destroy
hostile automatic guns and personnel and clear the way for
the advance of infantry . Antitank guns passed over by the
first echelon must be silenced by the leading waves of the
second echelon. (See par . 38c.)
(c) The tank platoons of the third echelon advance with
4
TANK PLATOON 4
the infantry, destroy hostile machine guns passed over by
the second echelon, and hostile personnel . The mission of
this echelon is to assist the advance of the infantry. They
may lead the infantry attack if resistance is still heavy.
If resistance has been broken by the first two echelons, tanks
of the third echelon will follow the infantry, prepared to
attack isolated resistance as necessary. These tanks also
protect the infantry from counterattack, particularly of
mechanized forces.
5
9 10
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
SECTION III
WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION
• 9, GENERAL .-The tank is armed with several weapons of
different calibers each of which is provided with more than
one type of ammunition . The tank crew must be carefully
trained in the characteristics of these weapons, their capabilities
and limitations, and the proper use of each . The
gunner and tank commanders must know instinctively what
weapons to use and the proper type of ammunition for each
target .
• 10. DESCRIPTION,-a . Depending upon the type of tank, the
weapons available are the caliber .30 machine gun, the 37-mm
gun, and the 75-mm gun. In addition, the tank has 12
grenades, fragmentation, incendiary, and smoke, and the
individual weapons of the crew, submachine gun and pistol .
b. The machine gun is an antipersonnel weapon . When
fired from a stationary tank it may be effective at ranges
up to 2,500 yards . However, it will normally not be used
beyond 1,000 yards . From a moving tank not equipped with
the gyro stabilizer, the machine gun should not be used at
ranges greater than 300 yards . With the gyro stabilizer,
ranges are the same as from a stationary tank . The M1919A4
caliber .30 machine gun cannot deliver sustained fire like
the M1917 water-cooled gun . Caliber .30 armor piercing ammunition
will penetrate the shield of antitank weapons at
200 yards.
c. The 37-mm gun has three-types of ammunition : cannister,
high explosive, and armor piercing .
(1) Cannister ammunition is used against personnel at
ranges up to 200 yards. (See FM 23-80 and FM 23-81 .)
(2) High explosive ammunition is used against unarmored
weapons in position, such as machine guns or antitank guns,
from an unprotected side . It is no good against armored
vehicles or bunkers .
(3) 37-mm armor piercing ammunition is effective against
most hostile light and medium tanks up to a range of 800
yards . It is also used against emplacements .
30
TANK PLATOON
d, The 75-mm gun is equipped with armor piercing, high
explosive, and smoke shell,
(1) Armor,piercing ammunition is effective against most
hostile tanks up to a range of 1,600 yards. The armor piercing
shell itself is effective against unarmored vehicles beyond
limit of vision of the firer, normally 2,500 to 3,000 yards.
(2) High explosive ammunition is used against antitank
guns, machine-gun emplacements, and occasionally against
personnel . It is effective beyond the limit of vision (see (1)
above) . By indirect fire with an observer, it may be used at
ranges of 7,500 yards .
(3) Smoke ammunition is effective as in (1) and (2) above .
It is used to screen antitank guns so that the tank may move
to a more favorable position . The smoke cloud from this
projectile is effective 50 yards downwind and the smoke element
burns for 10 seconds . The smoke is placed in front of or
on the target. For the greatest effect, fire to the windward
and just in front of the target. If wind direction cannot be
determined, fire just in front of the target on the line tanktarget.
Note direction of smoke cloud and fire another shell
if necessary. If wind is blowing indirectly toward you, fire
in or just behind the target . The smoke shell is also effective
against personnel and is incendiary .
E 11 .'CONSERVATION OF AMMUNrTION,-Each exercise scheduled
for company training must include training in ammunition
conservation . Although exercises are conducted without
ammunition, this subject must always be kept in mind .
During exercises, the 37-mm and 75-mm gunner should be
required to simulate firing and assistant gunners should keep
track of the number of rounds the gunner has simulated
firing . When all ammunition is fired, the gunner ceases
firing. This is one of the principal ways in which troops
can be trained in conservation of ammunition . If promiscuous
simulated firing without thought of ammunition supply
is permitted, wasteful habits will be developed . The tank
commander requires frequent reports from gunners concerning
ammunition supply . The chart below shows in a startling
manner what a comparatively small amount of ammunition
is available .
31
f
10-11
Light tank, M3:
32
Number of
targets. that
can be engaged
with
ammunition
available
at 5
rounds per
target
TANK PLATOON 11
0 Without a gyro stabilizer, do not fire from a moving tank at a
point target 300 yards distant (see par. lob) . This is a waste of
ammunition.
p Fire from stationary tank . Move nearer if It is only an enemy
machine gun .
FIGURE 22 .-Firing on a point target from moving target.
33
3 caliber .30 machine
guns
1 37-mm gun
4,000
103
125
10
10
10
2 1
Medium tank M3 :
2 caliber .30 machine
guns 4,000 125 16
1 37-mm gun 150 10 15 30
1 75-mm gun 50 6 8 10
Medium tank M4 :
2 caliber .30 machine
guns 4,000 125 16
1 caliber .50 machine
gun 300 125 2. 5
1 75-mm gun 96 6 16 15
11
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Usable Number of
rate of minutes
ammuni
Weapons Rounds
carried
fire per
minute tion will
per last, firing
weapon at usable rate
I1 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 Do not attack a dismounted column with the slow-firing 37-mm
gun with armor piercing or high explosive shell; the effect will not
be great enough .
0 Make a surprise attack with the fast-firing machine gun. If
column is within 200 yards, use 37-mm cannister .
FIGuRE 25 .-Attacking a column of foot troops or horse cavalry .
36
TANK PLATOON
0 When you are not under fire, do not fire at 500 yards, or greater
range, from a moving tank at an enemy antitank gun which is
firing at some other target . The effect of your fire is too uncertain
and discloses your position .
0 Coo into position at once and shoot with all guns at the crew of
the antitank gun ; the effect of fire from a stationary tank at 800
yards range is excellent,
FIGURE 26 .Attacking hostile antitank gun which is firing at some
other target.
37
11
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD, MANUAL
.' a
0
FIGURE 27 .-Attacking hostile antitank gun that is firing at another
target . (See also fig . 26 .)
38
i TANK PLATOON
0 Attack at once ; fire with atl guns at the enemy antitank gun .
Frousa 28 .-Attack more dangerous target.
39
11
0 Do not shoot at a larger but less dangerous target (ammunition
section) while an enemy antitank gun is moving into position .
11 ARMORED FORCE^ FIELD` MANUAL
Do not fire with a machine gun at an antitank gun going into
position at ranges in excess of 800 yards .
© Fire with the 37-mm or 75-mm gun at the antitank gun going
into position .
FIeuaE 29 .-Firing at an antitank gun going into position .
40
TANK PLATOON
0 Do not attack an antitank gun frontally at 350 yards or greater
range by machine-gun fire . The machine-gun projectiles do not
penetrate the armor plate at ranges greater than 350 yards .
® Fire at the target with the 37-mm armor piercing or 75-mm high
explosive or armor piercing shell . It will penetrate the armor
plate, destroy the weapon, and eliminate the crew .
FIGURE 30 .-Attacking an antitank gun frontally.
41
11
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Q Do not
yards away) pointing
gun
a
any
direction .
gun
(400
© Fire with all guns at the unprotected flank of the antitank gun .
Frau= 31 .-Firing at a hostile antitank gun.
4 2
TANK PLATOON
p Do not fire at antitank gun with 37-mm tank gun at close range .
QIt is sufficient to use the machine gun, as armor piercing
machine-gun ammunition will penetrate the armor plate at short
ranges .
FIGURE 32 .-Firing at hostile antitank gun .
43
11
11 ArtMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Q When an oncoming enemy tank is'met, do not keep moving toward
it, firing during movement, if suitable stationary positions are
available .
Q Move into position at once and take the enemy tank under fire
with armor piercing projectiles from your stationary tank .
FIGURE 33.Attacking enemy tanks.
4 4 486462°-42--4
45
TANK PLATOON
11
/000 ros
Q Do not attack an enemy tank with the 37-mm tank gun at more
than 800 yards . This is a waste of ammunition,
(D Let enemy tank approach to within at least 800 yards range .
FIGURE 34 .-Firing at hostile tanks .
O-~ 0
Q Do not attack an enemy tank with explosive shells .
0
r7
Q Fire with armor piercing shells .
FIGURE 35 .-Attacking enemy tanks .
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
ODo not . fire at an enemy machine gun, not emplaced, with the
slow-firing 37-mm tank gun using high explosive or armor
piercing shell . This is a waste of ammunition .
0 Eliminate the enemy machine-gun crew by fast-firing machine
guns or use 37-mm cannister if within 200 yards .
FIGURE 36.Attacking hostile machine guns.
4 6
TANK PLATOON
e
0 Use 37-mm or 75-mm explosive or armor piercing ammunition .
Ptom tz 37.-Attacking an emplaced machine gun .
47
0 Do not fight an emplaced machine gun with a machine gun .
it
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 Do not try, tq destroy the crew of an enemy machine gun at
close range with explosive shells .
CAt°"close rarige,°'use machine guns to -destroy living targets . If
range is less than 200 yards, use cannisters .
FIGURE 38 .-Attacking a hostile machine gun at close range .
48
TANK PLATOON
p Do not fire with machine gun at loopholes of the bunker . This
will probably not be successful,
0 Destroy the loopholes by 37-mm or 75-mm tank gun fire, using
armor piercing projectiles .
FIGURE 30,Firing at loopholes in a bunker .
49
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 Do not fire with high explosive on a target not exactly determined .
I
WINO
0 Screen with smoke shell the view of the suspected weapon, thus
hindering its effectiveness .
Frouu 40.-Firing at target the position of which has not been
exactly determined .
WIdID
(9
-4
or-r 0
0 When the wind is blowing from the side, do not aim smoke shell
at the front of the target .
~(!dD
0 Aim the shell to the windward side . The wind will blow the
smoke in front of the target .
FIGORE 41 .-Use of smoke shell, flank wind .
50
0 When the wind is blowing from your front, do not place the
smoke shell in front of the target . This does not blind the
antitank gun.
- s- h'rND
X' Yos
0
shell against definitely located Infantry
weapons .
/J
0 O 700 YO5 ~~
0
00 Destroy infantry weapons by high explosive shel :s and ricochet
firing .
FIGURE 43 .-Use of smoke shell against small arms .
51
0 Do not use smoke
TANK PLATOON
-Woo)
Ar.
0In this case, place the shell behind the target ; then the wind will
screen it completely .
FIGURE 42 .-Use of smoke shell, head wind .
WI~D
0
11
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
900YDS
0 While changing position, do not answer antitank gun . fire with
explosive shells .
0 Blind the antitank gun immediately with smoke shell, proceed to
the next position, and from there destroy the antitank gun with
explosive shell .
FIGURE 44 .-Use of smoke shell to cover maneuver.
52
TANK PLATOON
53
11
0 Do not try to eliminate an observation post with explosive shell .
Q Blind the observation point with smoke shell and then destroy it .
FIGURE 45,Use of smoke shell to, .blind an observation point .
CHAPTER 3
CONTROL, ORDERS, AND RECONNAISSANCE
• 12 . CONTROL,-a. Purpose.--Control is essential to coordinated
action . Loss of control leads to uncoordinated and
uneffectual effort . The platoon leader must at all times be
able to direct the maneuver of his platoon and to concentrate
the fire power of the platoon as desired,
b . Tactical control.-The platoon leader controls the platoon
initially by clear, definite orders as to direction of attack,
zones, and objectives. During the attack he controls movement
by means of radio orders and flag signals . Less frequently,
orders will be given to assembled tank commanders
during lulls in the fighting.
c . Fire control .-For fire control of individual weapons by
the tank commander, see Field Manual for the weapon concerned.
For list of Field Manuals and Technical Manuals,
see FM 21-6 . Prior to the attack the platoon leader points
out known targets and indicates which weapons are to fire
on these targets. For the advance, he designates tanks to
guard to the front, right, and left . (See FM 17-12, 23-80,
23-81, and 23-95 .) ' During the attack the platoon leader by
radio directs the fire of his platoon or of a .tank or section
upon certain targets if these targets have not already been
adequately engaged .
∎ 13 . ORDERS,-a. Initial orders are given to the assembled
tank commanders from a point from which as much as practicable
of the area over which the platoon is to advance can
be seen . If this is impracticable, show the zone and direction
of advance on a map, sketch, or aerial photograph . Indicate
objectives and rallying points . Make the order brief
but clear . The order should include-
(1) Information of the enemy and terrain .
(2) Mission of the company .
(3) Mission of the platoon .
(4) Fire support, that is, mortar, assault gun, or artillery .
(5) Attack position .
(6) Direction of attack .
54
TANK PLATOON
1 3-14
(7) Objectives.
(8) Formation of platoon .
(9) Scheme of maneuver, that is, attack straight to front
or one section making envelopment, orders for each section .
if platoon does not attack in one wave.
(10) Time of attack or signal for the attack,
(11) Rallying point.
(12) Alternate rallying point .
(13) Special signals, if any.
b. During, the advance, orders are given by radio or by flag
signal, except during lulls in combat, when section leaders
or tank commanders may be assembled for receiving orders .
FIGURE 46.-Do not give orders from map or by description alone if
you can reach a position from which terrain and enemy may be
pointed out .
∎ 14 . RECONNAISSANCE .-..a. The tank platoon is not a reconnaissance
unit although at times it may be used for
reconnaissance purposes. When on purely reconnaissance
missions, its functions are as described in FM 17-20 . This
paragraph covers employment and battle reconnaissance .
b. The tank has limitations as a reconnaissance vehicle due
to limited observation and noise . However, in many situations
tanks must be used for reconnaissance because of their
55
14
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
armament and armor protection . Much of the employment
reconnaissance, because of these restrictions and also to prevent
discovery of the presence of tanks, must be made on
foot. However, every effort should be made to thoroughly re=
connoiter the terrain and the enemy positions . Employment
reconnaissance may be classified as hasty and deliberate .
FIGURE 47.-Give order from point where terrain and enemy can
be seen .
i
(1) When attacking from march column or when making
a deep movement into enemy held terrain, deliberate reconnaissance,
because of the lack of time, may not be possible .
In such case the platoon leader makes a hasty map
reconnaissance, gains all the information he can from his
company commander, and passes all information along to
his tank commanders . He tentatively selects his route of advance
from the map or carefully studies the route designated
by the company commander. He notes what will apparently
be difficult places, places where cover Is meager or lacking,
and available cover . As he advances, he moves from observation
point to observation point and continuously studies
the ground to the front and flanks.
(2) (a) During combat, reconnaissance Is continuous . The
platoon leader and individual tank commander constantly
56
TANK PLATOON 14
observe in order to choose routes, select positions, and find
enemy installations . The platoon leader must keep his company
commander informed concerning the situation, He
should constantly ask himself the following questions :
1. Where am I?
2. Where is the enemy?
3. What is my mission?
4. What is the enemy doing?
5. What weapons is he using?
6. How can I best use the terrain?
(b) In his reports to the company commander, the platoon
leader should answer all or part of the following questions :
1. Where am I?
2. What am I doing?
3. Where is the enemy?
4. What is the enemy doing?
5. What weapons is he using against me?
6. What is enemy's strength?
7. What is on my flanks?
8. What are my losses?
9. What am I going to do?
(3) In a coordinated attack, particularly In the penetration
of a position, there will usually be more time for reconnaissance.
If infantry or reconnaissance units are in contact
with the enemy and time Is available after receipt of
orders (see FM 17-22), the platoon leader, section leaders,
tank commanders, and drivers if possible, reconnoiter the
ground from the attack position to the line of departure .
From an observation point, the zone of advance is studied
as far forward as practicable and routes for each tank
selected . Maps or aerial photographs are studied to determine
character of terrain beyond, the limit of vision . This
reconnaissance cannot be too detailed .
c. During battle, reconnaissance is continuous to discover
enemy positions and weapons, routes of approach, detours
around Impassable ground, and anything that will affect the
progress of the platoon .
d. The platoon leader must keep his company commander
fully informed of the results of reconnaissance. When reporting,
be sure to give your own position .
57
1 4 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 48 .--Observation.
58
COVERED APPROACHBUT
MAY BE MARSHY
CHAPTER 4
MARCHES
15. GENERAL .-For detailed discussions of marches, see FM
17-10, 17-50, 17-32, 17-33, and 25-10 . For security on the
march, see chapter 5 .
a . A good march places men and equipment at their destination
at the proper time and in condition to fight . The success
of a march depends upon good march discipline which
can be obtained only by practice and rigid enforcement of
march rules .
b . The platoon, except when detailed on security missions,
marches as part of the company. The platoon leader, when
contact with the enemy is not imminent, marches at the head
of the platoon and is responsible for the proper distance from
the unit ahead . He frequently observes to the rear to check
on his platoon . When contact is imminent, platoon leaders
will usually march at the head of the company and platoons
are conducted by the platoon sergeant,
c. Radio silence is maintained when in the presence of the
enemy and as otherwise ordered. However, radio receivers
are turned on and tuned to the battalion or other frequency as
directed in order that immediate air alarm may be transmitted
to all tanks .
d . A march must not be considered as a joy ride . All men
must be alert . Weapons must be ready to repel a ground or
air attack. Tank commanders observe from the turret and
keep close watch for enemy air or ground troops and for distance
to the tank ahead .
e . The following should be particularly stressed (see also
FM 17-32) :
(1) Keep proper distance from vehicle ahead.
(2) Glance to rear occasionally to observe march of other
vehicles .
(3) Watch for air or ground attack .
(4) Keep to right of road when there is two-way traffic .
Travel in center of high-crowned road when there is one-way
traffic but watch out for vehicles trying to pass .
59
29
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
29 . COVERING DETACHMENT .As a covering detachment, the
platoon precedes the company or battalion from an assembly
position to the line of departure and protects from surprise .
The covering detachment moves on a broad front, 100 to 200
yards between tanks, and precedes the leading echelon by
500 to 1,000 yards .
T 0 0
1000-
2000
YDS
120
FIGURE 100 .-Covering detachment.
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSIVE ACTION
.
SECTION I
GENERAL
• 30. GENERAL .-Offensive action of armored force units is
discussed in FM 100-5 and 17-10 . The tank is primarily an
offensive weapon. Opportunity is sought at all times to
exploit its characteristics of fire power, mobility, armor protection,
and shock action .
• 31 . FORMATIONS The various formations described herein
are suited for particular types of operation . They should
be practiced constantly so that one formation maybe quickly
assumed from any other formation . (See FM 17-5 .)
a. Line.-This formation develops great fire power to the
front . It is suitable for leading waves of the attack when
heavily supported by other weapons . It has no depth. It is
useful for a covering force .
b . Line of sections.This formation might also be column
of sections . It does not develop as much initial fire power
to the front as does line . . However, it lends itself readily to
fire and maneuver, one section occupying firing positions to
protect the advance of the other . The formation is easy to
control .
c. Column .-This formation develops little fire power to
the front. It is useful primarily for approach marches,
passing through heavy woods, and passing defiles . It is easy
to control
d. Echelon .-This formation is useful for a flank platoon .
It develops great initial fire power either to the front or flank .
It is difficult to control .
121
Paragraphs
BECTIOx I . General 30-32
II . Tank crew 33-35
III . Tank platoon 36-92
31 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
200-800 YDS --
0100-
400
YDS 0
01 r240000 v-
LINE OF SECTIONS
/1 YDS_~
-200.400 YDS2
WEDGE INVERTEDWEDGE
FIGURE 107 .-Formations .
e . Wedge,-Wedge is a modified line-of-sections forma
tion . It affords good fire power to the front and either flank,
It is easy to control as far as direction is concerned . However,
its ire power is difficult to control due to the fact that
the platoon leader is not in a position to see his sections
readily.
122
TANK PLATOON
31-32
f . Inverted wedge .-Without radio, this formation is difficult
to control as far as direction is concerned. However,
when radio is operating ; the platoon leader can keep his platoon
under close control -as, he is able to see all tanks and at
the same time search the terrain for targets . He can by
radio readily direct the movement of either section . This
formation often results in combat when the platoon leader
sends one section on an enveloping movement, covers its
movement by the fire of the other section, and orders both
sections to assault when the enveloping section is in position .
IN 32 . INSTALLATIONS .-The installations with which the tank
platoon or section is primarily concerned are the assembly
area, attack position, line of departure, and rallying point .
a. Assembly area.-The assembly area is an area in which
troops preparing to attack are assembled . In this area the
tank platoon checks tanks, makes necessary adjustments on
tanks and equipment, refuels tanks, checks on food and water,
and receives information of the enemy and of the terrain .
Orders for the attack may be issued in the assembly area . .
Usually the general plan of attack will be given here and .
final orders issued in the attack position . The assembly
area is normally beyond hostile medium artillery range .
b . Attack position.-The attack position is the last covered .
or concealed position before the line of departure is reached . .
Here last-minute checks are made on vehicles and final Ordersissued.
Here the final coordination with infantry is effected . .
Tanks must not stay in the attack position more than a few
minutes. A long stay will cause surprise to be lost and will .
expose the platoon to hostile artillery fire .
c . Line of departure.-The line of departure is a well
defined, easily recognizable terrain feature such as a small
stream line or edge of a woods . Separate lines of departure
may be given for individual platoons or companies . This is,
particularly true when a portion of the unit is making an
envelopment .
d. Rallying point,The rallying point is a position where
the unit reorganizes after the attack . It should be a welldefined,
easily recognizable terrain feature. It should afford
concealment . It is usually in front of an objective. An_
123
32
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
alternate rallying point, usually the attack position, is designated
to be occupied in case the rallying position is unobtainable
or untenable . A series of rallying points may be
designated, one for each objective . The platoon leader may
designate a rallying point but ordinarily this point will be
designated by the company commander . At the rallying point
4,000-
10,000
YDS
LD
F ataa 108,-Installations,
124
33 . COOPERATION .-a. The speed, fire power, armor protecon,
and crushing power of the tank must be used to the
tmost . To secure the maximum effectiveness of these
haracteristics, the tank commander must control his crew
nd the crew must have the maximum of coordination and
ooperation .
b, The tank commander in accordance with orders of the
llatoon or section leader, or on his own initiative when such
rders are lacking, controls the direction of movement by
rders to the driver and controls the fire by orders to the
pinners. Crew members must be trained, however, to act
nstinctively. The tank commander should not have to give
ong, detailed orders. In fact, he will not have time to do
that. His orders must be brief .
c. The tank commander directs the driver to drive in a
ertain direction or on a certain point . From time to time he
ells him to vary the direction as necessary . The driver makes
hanges of directionao avoid irregularities in the ground, to
ake advantage of good terrain, and to avoid antitank gun fire .
He must not make a sudden change of direction or stop
without notifying the tank commander and gunner. Such
action will interfere with the aim of the gunners .
d. The tank commander designates targets to the gunners
and controls the fire of the guns by specifying the type of
ammunition, if necessary, and by adjusting fire . The gunner
must instinctively know and use the proper type of ammunition
.
1 34 . .O-PEFRiAgTuIrOeNs 109 to 117, inclusive, depict
methods of operation and technique for the individual tank .
486462°--42-9
1 2 5
TANK PLATOON
32-34
e platoon posts security, reorganizes, makes adjustments in
mmunition, and cares for casualties, and the platoon leader
ports the status of the platoon to the company commander.
SECTION II
TANK CREW
34
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
I
FIGURE 109 .-Beat down crew of enemy machine gun with fire, and
then crush the gun . Tanks are permitted to move somewhat
(about 60 yards) to the right or left of their line of advance to
do this . Beware of antitank mines,
I
p Tank No . 1 should hold its line of advance and let tank No . 2
take care of the enemy machine gun. Tank No . 1 may Indicate
location of enemy machine gun by firing tracer .
FraURE 110,Leaving direction of advance .
126
TANK PLATOON
1 2 7
34
Q Tank No. 1 should not leave its line of advance to crush an
enemy machine gun` lying a considerable distance (more than 50
yards) to the right or left .
34 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
1 2 8
TANK PLATOON
T Do not disregard members of enemy machine-gun crew who have Q Do not fight against the plainer suu £ L5 uw6ou
fled to shell holes .
there is a more dangerous, although smaller, target (machine
gun) .
0 Mop up enemy crew by running over the shell hole .
p Destroy the most dangerous target although it is small and
FIGURE 111 .-Crush machine guns near direction of advance . Be.
indistinct .
ware of antitank mines .
FIGURE 112-Strike more dangerous target.
129
34
34 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 Do not immediately abandon a tank which has become
immovable .
0 Remain in the tank and participate in the combat as long as
possible .
FIGURE 113.-Abandoning tank.
1 3 0
TANK PLATOON
© When tank No . 1 becomes immovable and Its crew is endangered
by attack of the enemy, tank No . 2 must support and assist
tank No . 1 .
Q Tank No . 2 assisting tank No . 1 .
FIGURE 114 .-Assist disabled tanks .
131
34
34 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Q Do not use saddle between two hills without seeing what is
behind the hills .
Q Seek out and destroy heavy weapons in position behind the hills .
FIGURE 115 .-Beware of ridges .
1 3 2
i r
TANK PLATOON
133
34
34 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
194
135
TANK PLATOON
85-37
•
35 .. ABANDONING TANK .-For procedure in abandoning tank
see FM 17-5 .
SECTION III
TANK PLATOON
• 36. GENERAL,-The tank platoon usually operates as a unit
although sections or individual tanks may operate alone in
certain situations . The platoon commander controls his
! tanks by section or by individual tank .
5 37. FIRST ECHELON.--a. Tanks of the first echelon advance
rapidly under support of all available supporting weaponsartillery,
infantry weapons, and other tanks . When they
meet resistance, platoons use fire and maneuver to reduce
,that resistance . Tank platoon leaders keep their company
(commander constantly informed of the situation, their losses,
lenemy resistance, and action taken. Call upon the company
commander for artillery fire as needed.
b. The platoon commander of the leading wave of the first
echelon should comply with the following :
(1) Do not permit tanks to be diverted from their primary
mission by firing at unimportant targets .
(2) When resistance is met, use fire and maneuver.
(3) Select targets and give fire missions to the platoon .
(4) Use speed and terrain to accomplish mission .
(5) After a local attack, concentrate the platoon, reorganize,
and continue on mission.
(6) Keep company commander constantly informed of
the situation.
c. The tank platoons in the second wave of attack advance
by bounds from firing position to firing position and give
continuous support to the leading wave .
(1) Figure 118 shows diagrammatically a method of advance
and support. The arrows show the bounds made by
each tank in supporting the leading wave . The circled symbols
show firing positions taken by each tank .
(2) Tanks of the second wave must advance rapidly behind
the first wave. Some tanks must always be within supporting
distance. Crews of the tanks in position must be
37
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
extremely alert for targets . The tank cannot remain in .position
very long as it will become a very vulnerable target .
(3) Tanks emerging from the edge of woods or approaching
within 800 yards of a ridge must always be supported by
tanks in position .
(4) Tank platoons of the second wave may support the
leading wave by indirect fire methods when such methods
can give prompt support.
d. Tank platoons in the second wave of attack protect the
flanks and are ready to repel counterattacks,
}
}
0 0
0
00 0
.ACV,A/W7N SET MOPLWCOEVAMCWNS I TAOAF CENOT SWAVE
(4001
00
0 AV,
FIGURE 118 .-Support of leading wave by second wave .
I
136
MCPMYWECME( NOTE TOMfE EMNE7 MYP°o WSAiVTEIW AMA
171E I"WAVE E AU APVAMCIAE S~Cf~p~1PTEP NV
PLATOOT'I POOP
EPICMT SEC770M SONFCMTTASAPRNWS8 OAS/I7KW
EITIAM WAiNEECITTAM~ESyVPTNEPR1STH
IONT AYTEAPST TTAIE F(AAAC EtCf r1WAAEPT IESECOCYTTIIAOSINA7Y oMPYTOS m7n Ia^v W ATVFMI SSaTymPFR AT WOKE TMIE THE 2 WAVE GOES INTO
ATLAMKAE SO OANP I/RNONATT~P ZT~EORWREAAWI NC ,CAE,N,TA.A.T.E ST OA AONSDC IOMf EHTIOSWN PIAHEAPYAMCF11rAWI ARW
TOCA;
TANK PLATOON
ENEMY
137
SECOND WAVE
FIGURE 119 .-A method of support of leading wave by indirect fire .
• 38. SECOND ECHELON. a. The second echelon follows the
first echelon close enough so that the enemy will not have
time to reconstitute his antitank defense . This echelon, in
addition to its mission of destruction of hostile automatic
weapons and antitank guns passed over by the first echelon,
protects the flanks and repels counterattacks from the flanks .
b. Some platoons of the second echelon may be detailed
to support by fire the first echelon . In such operations, their
action is the same as the second wave of the leading echelon .
c. The infantry may attack with the second echelon . The
infantry attacks with the leading wave. The tanks do not
38
LEADING WAVE
38-40
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
slow down to the pace of the infantry but keep on moving
fast. Succeeding waves pass through, the infantry .
0 39. THIRD ECHELON,-a. The third echelon of attack usually
attacks with the infantry and assists the infantry to advance .
The infantry may advance with the second echelon (see
par. 38) . This echelon will run away from the infantry
and the third echelon of tanks then takes over the task of
assisting the infantry.
b. The infantry may advance behind the second echelon of
attack in carriers until forced to dismount. When the infantry
is forced to dismount, the tanks first take position to
cover this action and then, assisted by the infantry, attack
the enemy resistance by fire and maneuver .
∎ 40. ATTACK WITH INFANTRY.-a. When the infantry attacks
first to secure ground from which a tank attack may be
launched, tanks when practicable take position to assist the
attack by fire . This assistance may be either by direct or
indirect fire . , Targets are machine guns and other automatic
weapons . Pill boxes or emplacements may be demolished
by armor piercing ammunition . The tank platoon
leader is assigned a sector in which to support the infantry .
He may be assigned targets or may fire on targets as they
disclose themselves,
b. When attacking through infantry in position, arrangements
are made with the infantry for a . passage of lines .
These arrangements include paths to be taken by the tanks
and means for infantrymen to identify themselves so they
will not be run down by the tanks . All members of the tank
crew must be particularly alert to prevent injury to their
own infantry.
c. When attacking with infantry, the following should be
observed when applicable :
(1) The platoon advances by fire and maneuver, one section
always covering the advance of the infantry and the
other section .
(2) The platoon joins in the fire fight only against dangerous
targets . Do not waste ammunition on hostile riflemen
at long range . The infantry supporting weapons will take
care of that .
1 3 8
(3) Be prepared to protect the infantry against a mechanized
attack .
(4) Destroy antitank guns immediately .
(5) If the platoon attacks ahead of the riflemen, hold the
ground gained until the riflemen close up .
(6) Keep close contact with the rifle unit commander .
Q In approach, do not use a wide formation which may cause part
of the tanks to strike an obstacle and be lost .
TANK PLATOON
0
0
139
0
40
p In approach, use a deep formation so the platoon commander has
all the tanks behind him and can guide or halt them as necessary .
FIGURE 120 .-Formation in approach,
40 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
p) Do not begin a fire fight from a deep formation because fire of too
few weapons can be brought Into play .
0
Begin the fire fight from a wide front so fire power of all weapons
can be Immediately brought into play .
FIGURE 121 .-Formation for beginning fire fight.
1 4 0
I
I
~
I
I
I
I I 0
I O
Q Do not move all tanks of the platoon forward at one time . This
causes many targets to be overlooked . Observation from a moving
tank is difficult .
0
(KD
TANK PLATOON
0
Q Move platoon forward by having some tanks observe while others
move. By alternating movement and halts, the great advantage
of shooting and observing from a stationary tank can be fully
utilized .
FIGURE 122 .-Method of advance .
486462 °-42-10
141
1 0
40
40 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 Do not have all tanks of the platoon shoot at a discovered antitank
weapon while moving .
G Part of the platoon fires from halted tanks In defilade and the
remainder of the platoon moves to envelop the enemy. The
antitank weapon can usually be destroyed by the well-aimed fire
of stationary tanks .
FIGURE 123 .-Attacking an antitank gun .
14 2
TANK PLATOON 40
FIGURE 124,-Observe occasionally from a halted tank . The field of
view of the observer (especially In flank tanks) is increased by
halting, Fire against an antitank target can better be observed .
Halt in defilade or concealment .
142
40 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 4
J Do not advance the platoon on an open flank in a line or wedge
formation . In such formation, the observation and ability to
fire to a flank is limited .
T
0 Echelon the platoon on the open flank . In this formation, the
weapons of all tanks have a full field of fire toward the Ranks .
FIGURE 125-Formation for an open flank .
1 4 4
TANK PLATOON
0 0
p, When confronted with both an antitank gun and a machine gun,
do not attack the machine gun first and thus allow the more
dangerous weapon, the antitank gun, to continue firing .
® Destroy by fire and movement the enemy antitank gun,
disregarding the less dangerous targets .
FIGURE 126,-Destroy more dangerous targets .
145
40
40 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Q Do not continue movement when the leading wave of tanks halts.
The platoon then becomes bunched, providing an excellent target
for the enemy . Bunching also limits use of tank weapons .
9A 9
9
p When the leading wave of tanks is stopped, halt the platoon at
once under cover at a distance from the leading platoon .
FIouaE 127 .-Halt platoon when leading wave of tanks stops .
14 6
TANK PLATOON
Q Do not cross a hill with all tanks in movement and no tanks
ready to fire .
p The platoon should cross a hill by alternating movement with
halts, In this way, belted tanks cover movement of remainder
of platoon.
FIouaE 128.-Crossing a hill or ridge .
147
40
40 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
A
0 Do not hold to the mission to fight enemy infantry In spite of
the fact that the leading platoon has suffered heavy losses from
antitank weapons .
1 4 8
® When the leading wave has suffered losses from enemy antitank
guns, Immediately abandon the infantry mission and attack, by
fire and movement, the most dangerous weapons .
FIGURE 129,-Attack more dangerous target .
TANK PLATOON
149
41-42
0 41, TANK VERSUS TANK ACTION .-a. In tank versus tank
action, it is essential that tank crews be able to recognize readily
hostile tanks, that they know the capabilities of these tanks,
the vulnerable points at which to fire, and the capabilities of
their own and enemy tank weapons . In tank versus tank
action, every advantage must be taken of terrain, the sun,
direction of wind, weather, and your own weapons .
b . If outranged by hostile weapons the following may be
done:
(1) Move to concealed positions and send some tans to
the enemy flanks .
(2) Withdraw behind your own antitank gun defenses,
keeping out of range of the enemy weapons,
(3) Close on the enemy at maximum speed, attacking from
direction of the sun if practicable,
c. If your weapons out-range those of the enemy, close to
effective range of your weapons but keep out of range of the
enemy and halt to fire.
0 42. ATTACKING FORTIFICATIONS .Tanks avoid attacking fortifications
when possible. However, it may be necessary to
attack bunkers, pill boxes, and fixed gun emplacements in
order to effect a break-through, These fortifications are
attacked by small teams consisting of a tank platoon, an
infantry platoon;°and engineers, supported by artillery and
mortars, The method of attack will vary with the terrain,
the armament of the emplacement, and the wind direction .
a. Attacking machine-gun emplacements .-In attacking a
machine-gun emplacement, a section of tanks covered by the
remainder of the platoon rush the emplacement and destroy
it by crushing . If the emplacement cannot be destroyed by
crushing, infantry or engineers following the tanks destroy
the personnel by dropping a grenade in an opening or by
use of a flame thrower .
b. Destroying antitank gun emplacement .-In attacking an
antitank gun emplacement, methods must be varied according
to wind and terrain conditions,
(1) If wind conditions are favorable, that Is, from flank or
down range-
(a) Artillery and air bombardment destroy enemy artillery .
42 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 130 .-When enemy tanks are encountered, place some tanks
in defilade and maneuver others to flank .
1 5 0
2000 YDS
TANK PLATOON
ENEMY GUNS
EFFECTIVE
AT 1500 YDS
151
42
FIGURE 131 .-If you cannot maneuver to the flank or take up
defiladed position, withdraw to your own antitank defense .
42
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
2000 YDS
~ \
EFFECTIVE
RANGE
rA
ENEMY GUNS
l
1500 YARDS
\~ 1
FrcunE 132 .-If you cannot withdraw to antitank defenses, close
with enemy at maximum speed and attack him from the sun .
Your supporting mortars should place smoke on the enemy 1f
within range,
1 5 2
000 000
N} 0LO }
TANK PLATOON
42
EFFECTIVE
RANGE
ENEMY GUNS
800 YARDS
rt
( V )
(`v)
(`V )
1500 YARDS ,
T
0 0 0
FIGURE 133 .-If you outrange the enemy, close to effective range but
keep out of his range .
153
EFFECTIVE
RANGE
A `
rq\
A1)
YOUR GUNS \A '
800 YARDS
V V V J EFFECTIVE
RANGE
YOUR GUNS
42
TANK PLATOON
42
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
(b) Just before the attack, artillery places a concentration
/500YDS-~
on the emplacement and adjacent infantry.
i
(c) Smoke is placed on the emplacement and those adj
acent .
(d) The tanks, followed closely by engineers and infantry,
rush forward . The tanks crush the protecting wire and the
infantry and engineers destroy the hostile gun crew .
(e) Infantry automatic weapons keep down the fire of adjacent
riflemen. After the emplacement is taken, tanks and
infantrymen destroy the adjacent troops .
(2) If wind direction is not right, that is, if it is blowing
toward you, the procedure is as follows :
(a) Artillery and air bombardment is used as in (1) above .
(b) Smoke adjacent emplacements .
(c) 'Infantry protected by automatic weapons and fire of
one section of tanks moves forward,
(d) One, section of tanks precedes the infantry .
(e) The other section of tanks fires on the loopholes of the
emplacement .
(() The leading section of tanks finds a good position and
brings fire on the loopholes and the rear section then advances .
(g) One section of tanks crushes protective wire while
other section covers this action .
(h) Infantry' and engineers then destroy the emplacement .
c . Attacking emplacements by platoon alone .-Should the
platoon have to attack the emplacement alone, use 75-mm
smoke shell to blind the defenders while one sections rushes
the emplacement.
0ENEMY
0 Do not fight an enemy antitank gun when an enemy tank is
approaching ; the enemy tank is the more dangerous weapon .
T From position, defend at once against the enemy tank attack .
FIGURE 134 .-Attack more dangerous target .
0 Do not ram an enemy tank . Your own tank may be rendered
useless .
+0 Destroy enemy tank by fire .
FIGURE 135.-Do not ram an enemy tank. Destroy it by fire .
1 5 4
155
CHAP hi-t VII
DEFENSE
i 43 . GENERAL .-Defensive action by armored units is covered
in FM 100-5 and FM 17-10. Tank plattons in defense are
used as counterattacking units . They are not used as armored
pill boxes .
∎ 44. PROCEDURE IN DEFENSE.--a . The tank platoon will be part
of a larger unit used as a counterattacking force . This force
makes limited objective attacks . The platoon functions as in
any other attack .
b, When in a defense position the tank platoon leader, his
tank commanders, and drivers make a thorough reconnaissance
of the ground over which they may attack ., Several
plans of attack may be given and the ground over which each
will take place must be thoroughly known . Some of this
reconnaissance must be made on foot . Landmarks must be
noted and complete plans made for the attack,
9 45. WITHDRAWAL,--a . The tank platoon, will usually be part
of a larger force. With this force it makes fast limited objective
attacks to disorganize the enemy and then rapidly withdraws
. In this action'the platoon may be used to give supporting
fires as in offensive action .
b . The platoon may also be used to cover road blocks . In
such action, tanks take position where they can cover by fire
the approaches to the road block and also be mutually supporting
in case the enemy sends dismounted men around the
block .
1 5 6
TANK PLATOON
486462
42----11 157
45
0a
0Nz0
U
to
45 ARMO3ED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Frouar. 137 .-Attacking emplacement, wind conditions not favorable .
1 58
INDEX
159
Paragraphs Page
Abandoning tank
Advance party
Ammunition
Antitank guns 11,
Artillery support
Assembly area
Attack :
35
25
9-11
125
85
30
34, 40 31, 125, 139
13, 25
54, 85
23,32 85, 123
135, 149
121
31,
125,138
149
123
125
135
149
138
73
1
54
125
3
120
156
3, 135
Echelons 37-39, 41
Formations 31
Of antitank guns 11,34,40
Of fortifications
Position
Tank crew In
Tank platoon in
Tank versus tank
With infantry
Bivouac
Characteristics
Control
Cooperation
Coordination
Covering detachment
Defense
42
32
33
36-42
41
40
22
3
12
33
4
29
43,44
Echelons of attack 4,37-39
Fire and maneuver 4 3
Fire control 12 54
Flank guard 26 104
Formations 31 121
Fortification, attack 42 149
Fundamentals 4,37 3,135
Halts 17,21 60,73
Infantry, attack with 40 138
Installations 32 123
Line of departure 32 123
Maintenance 18 60
Marches :
Discipline 15 59
Distance 16 60
General 15 59
Halts 17 60
Maintenance 18 60
Rate 16 60
Security 20,21 .25-27 70,73,85
Mass 4 3
FM 17-32, Armored Force Field Manual : The
Tank Company, Light and Medium (Extract),
1942
II
D 2, 7 (5) ; B 6 (5) ; IR 2, 7 (5) ; Bn and H 17, 18 (10) ;
I Bn 2, 5-10 (3) ; C 17 (20) ; IC 2, 5-7, 11 (5) .
(For explanation of symbols see FM 21-6 .)
z
III
WAR DEPARTMENT,
WASHINGTON, August 2, 1942 .
FM 17-32, Armored Force Field Manual, The Tank Company,
Light and Medium, is published for the information
and guidance of all concerned . TABLE OF CONTENTS
[A.G.062 .11 (8-28-42) .] Paragraphs Page
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR : SEcrroN I . General 1-8 1
G. C. MARSHALL,
Chief of Staff.
II . Training 9-10
III, Control, orders, liaison, reconnaissance,
maintenance 11-16
it
IV . Security 13 OFFICIAL : V. Marches 16-21 21 22-23 34
J . A . ULIO, VVIII .. ODfeffeennssiev e action 24-37 35 Major General, VIII . Jungle warfare 38-42 43-45
75
The Adjutant General . APPENDIX . Troop leading 77 78
DISTRIBUTION :
INDEX 85
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
SECTION I
GENERAL
1. ScopE.-a. This manual covers the tactics and technique
of the light and the medium tank company, and is
applicable to the tank companies of both armored regiments
and separate tank battalions . It supplements pertinent
matter contained in FM 17-10 . It covers the action
of the company when acting as part of the battalion and
when acting alone . The company will habitually be reinforced
whether acting alone or as part of the armored
battalion.
b . Key to illustrations :
ASSAULT GUN
AMMUNITION CARRIER
MORTAR CARRIER
INFANTRY
PERSONNEL CARRIER
TANK IN MOTION
TANK IN POSITION
1/4 TON
TRUCK
MOTORCYCLE
EXPLOSIVE
SHELL
FIRE
SMOKE
SHELL
FIRE
SYMBOLS TO INDICATE CERTAIN
COMPANY COMMANDER'S VEHICLE (HT
SECOND-IN-COMMAND'S VEHICLE (HT
PLATOON LEADER'S TANK
1
FM 17-32
VEHICLES
OR TANK)
OR TANK)
2-4
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
• 2 . PURPOSE.-This manual is only a guide to the employment
of the tank company. The formations and actions
described herein are not inflexible . Each tactical situation
must be solved on its own merits and not by blind application
of a set of inflexible rules . Initiative of all commanders
must be encouraged,
• 3. PRIOR TRAINING, Individual crew, section, and platoon
training should be completed before proceeding to company
training. The technique of operation of vehicles and
weapons and of the employment of the various weapons
should have been covered in earlier instructions. (See
sec . II .)
8 4. ORGANIZATION .-a. The tank company, both light and
medium, consists of a company headquarters and three
tank platoons of five tanks each .
b. Company headquarters .-(1) Company headquarters is
composed of a-
(a) Command section.
(b) Tank section.
(c) Communication-liaison-reconnaissance section .
(d) Maintenance section.
(e) Administrative and supply section .
(1) Mess section.
(2) On the march when combat is imminent and when
the company is in combat the administrative and supply
section and the mess section are with the battalion or higher
unit trains,
(3) The command section consists of the company commander
and various individuals mounted in a half-track
vehicle . During combat the company commander rides in
one of the tanks of company headquarters . The command
section half-track joins the maintenance officer .
(4) One tank of the tank section is used by the company
c'mmander. The other tank is used by the maintenance
officer who is also second-in-command of the company, This
tank is used as a replacement for the company commander's
or a platoon leader's tank .
(5) The communication-liaison-reconnaissance section is
equipped with a 1/4-ton truck. It is used on the march for
2
0S
U
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
0
3a
o , a ~I d I
/ a l0
N
a to
a !I
0A I A
2
Ja • z
O 0 i N
f
N
4
J
a S
a
•
o
3
4' 204
i 0 q
H
w
4
a a
n
0
0
Nm x
II~-
•
• m
00
w
0
4
C"
GO .-LN a
C O
C O
RCN SEC
~_
_-• Co HO
PLAT LOR
MAINT 0
Frouza 2 .-Medium tank company.
NORMAL ATTACHMENTS
MORTAR
AMMUNITION
ASSAULT GUN
H
FROM ON HQ
x
Haz
*04
aft
VI
x
0
LIGHT MG SQUAD
60 MM MORTAR SOD RIFLE SOD
RIFLE SOD
PLAT LOR
x
INFANTRY
_-• PLATOON
r
AT GUN
0
MAY BE ATTACHED
01114
004
PLAT LDR
PLAT LDR
MAINT 0
MESS
EQUIPMENT
EQUIPMENT
1sT SGT
NoOft0" 000%
NORMAL ATTACHMENTS SAME AS LIGHT TANK COMPANY
MAY BE ATTACHED SAME AS LIGHT TANKCOMANY
PLATOON
PLATOON
PLATOON
MAINTENANCE
ADM-SUPPLY
& MESS
.P
z
PLAT LOR aft r•%.,
:
r0`}
0_
FIGURE 3 .-Attachments, tank company, light and medium .
ON RCN
PLATOON
aea
4-5
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
reconnaissance short distances to the sides and for liaison
with higher headquarters, especially when the company is
attached to another unit such as an infantry battalion . When
not used for liaison this section remains with the maintenance
officer and proceeds with him to the company rallying point .
Here the staff sergeant in charge makes such repairs and
adjustments on radio sets as time and means permit .
(6) The maintenance section is organized and equipped
to perform second echelon maintenance for the company .
It is equipped with a'/4-ton truck and two half-track vehicles .
During the march it follows at the tail of the company and
makes such repairs to vehicles as it can. Vehicles beyond
the capabilities of the section to repair are left with their
crews, for regimental or maintenance battalion personnel .
During combat the section accompanies the company to the
attack position where it assists in making last minute repairs .
It follows the attack as closely as practicable, along an axis
of maintenance prescribed by the company commander, to
repair tanks that are out of action .
(7) The maintenance officer, second-in-command of the
company, commands the maintenance section and supervises
all maintenance in the company. He accompanies the company
to the attack position. After the attack starts he
assumes charge of all vehicles left at the attack position, that
is, the maintenance vehicles, the second company headquarters
tank, and the communication-liaison-reconnaissance
'/4-ton truck . He moves these vehicles forward, following
the company as closely as practicable, makes repairs on damaged
tanks, makes estimates of material needed to repair
those beyond the capabilities of his section to repair, transmits
this information with the exact locations of the disabled
vehicles to the regimental maintenance platoon, and rejoins
the company at the rallying point .
15, CHARACTERISTICS,--a, The tank is characterized by great
mobility, fire power, armor protection, and shock action .
These characteristics are possessed in varying degrees by
different types of tanks . The characteristics dictate the
manner of employment.
6
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
5-7
b . Light tanks, as compared to medium tanks, have less
fire power, lighter armor, and greater speed and maneuverability
. They are particularly fitted for-
(1) Feeling out the enemy and developing the weak spots
in the enemy position through which medium tanks may
attack,
(2) Screening the advance against light enemy resistance .
(3) Leading an attack against an unarmored enemy weak
in antitank defense, when speed is essential .
(4) A fast maneuvering force to exploit the success of
medium tanks.
(5) Maneuver to the flank or rear to strike the enemy
command posts, communication centers, and other vital
installations,
(6) Pursuing a defeated enemy,
c . Medium tanks, because of their greater fire power, guns
of heavier caliber, greater armor protection, and shocking
power are used to-
(1) Lead an attack against an enemy whose position and
strength is known .
(2) .'Support by fire the attack of either light or other
medium tanks.
16. OPERATION,-a. The tank company is normally employed
as part of the tank battalion, It may, however, be used as
advance, flank, and rear guard and on separate missions .
b . The reinforcement of the tank company will be normal .
Such reinforcements will vary from a mortar and an assault
gun from the battalion headquarters company to one or more
infantry platoons, engineers, artillery, and reconnaissance
elements. A light tank company may have a medium tank
platoon attached to or supporting it for certain operations .
17. FUNDAMENTALS.-a. Surprise .-Surprise is obtained by
striking the enemy at an unexpected time, from an unexpected
direction, and in sufficient numbers to gain the objective.
Speed of movement and the use of covered approaches
assist in gaining surprise . Seek to surprise your enemy but
do not let yourself be surprised . Give your enemy credit for
as much tactical knowledge as you have or more . Do not
7
7-8
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
underestimate him . Expect the unexpected and be prepared
for it .
b. Fire and maneuver,-The company advances by fire and
movement. A portion of the command maneuvers against
the enemy while the remainder covers that movement . This
covering force does not necessarily fire all the time while the
other force is maneuvering . It takes up positions where it
can bring effective fire on any enemy holding up the advance .
It fires only when necessary to assist the advance . After the
maneuvering force has advanced beyond supporting distance
of the covering force, it may take positions and become the
covering force while the former covering force becomes the
maneuvering force .
c. Mass.-Concentrate your fire power and shock action on
the enemy . Do not fritter away your strength on small,
unimportant targets. Concentrate on an objective that is
decisive ; the others will then fall .
d. Conservation of ammunition .-The tank carries a relatively
small amount of ammunition and resupply is difficult.
It is imperative that each round be made effective . Do not
fire with the 75-mm and 37-mm guns until there is something
at which to shoot . (See sec . II .)
∎ 8, TERRAIN .-a. The tank is sensitive to terrain. For most
efficient use, tanks should operate over terrain that will permit
advance by covered routes at good speed.
b. The tank company commander must continually study
terrain and seek to turn it to his advantage .
c. The following types should be avoided :
(1) Ground covered with large stumps .
(2) Heavy woods .
(3) Swamps.
(4) Ground covered with large boulders.
(5) Steep slopes,
d. Just because ground appears impassable for tanks does
not justify dismissal of possibility of attack either by yourself
or the enemy over such ground . Only by detailed reconnaissance
can passableness be determined . In many cases passage
of difficult ground is justified by surprise effect gained .
8
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 4.-Fire and maneuver. One platoon from defiladed stationary
positions, together with mortar and assault gun, supports
advance of other platoons .
9
8
tl
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
1'icuRE 5.-Fire and maneuver. After platoon has reached B it
takes up firing positions to cover advance of other platoons .
Mortar and assault gun displace forward .
1 0
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
9
SECTION II
TRAINING
19 . GENERAL.-a. Training of the tank company must be progressive
. It is divided roughly into phases as follows :
(1) Basic.
(2) Specialist .
(3) Marksmanship.
(4) Technique of fire .
(5) Section and platoon combat exercises without ammunition
.
(6) Combat practice firing .
(7) Company combat problems .
b . Each phase should be completed before proceeding to the
next. The efficiency of the company as a whole will depend
upon the thoroughness with which each individual unit is
trained .
c. Throughout the training period emphasis must be placed
upon cooperation, coordination, and individual initiative .
Training methods are covered in general in FM 21-5 .
d. Eact exercise scheduled for company training must include
training in ammunition conservation . Although exercises
are conducted without ammunition this subject must
always be kept in mind. During exercises the 37-mm and
75-mm gunners should be required to simulate firing and assistant
gunners should keep track of the number of rounds
the gunner has simulated firing . When all ammunition is
fired the gunner ceases firing . in this manner, and this only,
can troops be trained in the proper conservation of amtnunition.
If promiscuous simulated firing without thought of
ammunition supply is permitted, wasteful habits will be developed
. The tank commander requires frequent reports from
gunners concerning ammunition supply . The chart below
shows in a startling manner what a comparatively small
amount of ammunition is available,
11
22
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
SECTION V
MARCHES
6 22 . GENERAL .-a. The subject of marches Is covered In detail
in FM 17-10, 17-50, and 25-10 .
b . A good march depends upon good march discipline . This
can be obtained only by practice and rigid enforcement of
march rules .
c. Security on the march and at halts is covered in section
IV,
d. The rate of march of a tank column consisting all or
in part of medium tanks does not exceed 20 miles per hour .
A column composed of light tanks and half-track vehicles
may travel at a rate as high as 30 miles per hour. Such a
rate is advisable only in a tactical maneuver or when time is
crucial . Wear and tear on vehicles is great, deterioration
rapid. It must be remembered that a successful march is
one that Places the troops and equipment at their destination
at the proper time and in the proper condition to fight .
e . When air attack can be expected, and this is usual anywhere
in the theater of operations, distances between vehicles
during daylight marches are seldom less than 80 yards, approximately
88 yards per vehicle, This may be extended to
176 yards or 0 .1 mile. During night marches the density of
20 vehicles per mile should not be exceeded. However, vehicles
may be grouped into groups of approximately five,
closed to short distance . A good night driver is placed in the
leading vehicle of each group .
f. When combat is imminent, the company commander
will usually be with the battalion commander . Platoon leaders
assemble at the head of the company column . The company
is conducted by the senior platoon leader . Platoon sergeants
assume temporary command of the platoons . By such groupings,
orders can be given with less delay .
g. During the march certain designated members of the
vehicle crew must remain awake and alert at all times . When
contact is not imminent, one member detailed as alert man
watches for both ground and air attack . When contact
is imminent all members of the crew must be alert. Heavy
guns are loaded or prepared for loading . Machine guns are
34
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
22-24
half-loaded . Everything is made ready for instant action,
Certain men are detailed as air and ground guards to give
instant warning of attack . Do not let yourself be surprised .
N 23 . HALTS.-a. Halts are usually made for 15 minutes after
the first 45 minutes of march . Thereafter, halts of 10 minutes
are made at the end of 1 hour and 20 or 1 hour and 50
minutes of marching. In long columns, halts must be made
on a schedule as most of the troops will not be out of bivouac
at the end of 45 minutes . A long halt, usually 1/2 hour, is
made after 4 hours of'running time . This is for the purpose
of refueling . Again, In long columns this must be a scheduled
halt .
b . Drivers and tank commanders make regular inspection of
their vehicles at halts . One man must be left in the vehicle
to man the vehicular weapons in case of attack .
SECTION VI
OPerENSIVE ACTION
∎ 24. GENERAL.-a. The tank is an offensive weapon . Its offensive
powers of mobility, fire power, shock action, and armor
protection should be exploited to the limit .
b . The tank company will habitually be reinforced during
combat . (See sec. I.) The company may be used either
alone or as part of the battalion . It is used alone in advance,
rear, and flank guards, and may be used alone as a covering
force. As part of the battalion it may attack-
(1) As the first echelon of attack, the mission of which is
to destroy enemy antitank defenses, artillery, command posts,
and other rear installations .
(2) As the second echelon of attack, the mission of which
is to destroy infantry targets, especially machine guns, heavy
weapons, and antitank guns passed over by the leading
echelon. It also destroys command posts, communication
centers, and other rear installations .
(3) As the third echelon of attack, which advances with
the Infantry and destroys enemy machine guns and other
enemy installations holding up the infantry,
c. It must not be assumed that the tanks always attack
first. Many times the infantry will attack to secure ground
from which the tanks may attack .
35
2 4-25
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
d . In attack battalions are usually given zones of action .
Companies are assigned a frontage and direction of attack .
Zones and frontages must not be so narrow as to restrict
maneuver.
∎ 25. ASSEMBLY .--a . Before any attack, except in repelling a
surprise counterattack or when attacking direct from march
column, the company will occupy an assembly area or intermediate
positions where tanks are repaired and everything
made ready for battle .
b . Security in assembly areas is discussed in section IV .
C . The assembly area is selected by the battalion or higher
unit commander . A battalion guide or staff officer should
indicate the area to the company commander .
(1) The area should afford concealment, should not be
within range of hostile medium artillery, should have good
standings for vehicles, and should have good routes available
for entrance and exit .
(2) The area is occupied in such manner that units are in
proper formation to move direct to attack positions without
going through the areas of other troops .
(3) The company commander, riding behind the battalion
commander in column, is given his area assignment . He
divides the area into platoon areas and leaves a guide, usually
the communication sergeant in the I/4-ton truck, to guide
the platoons to their positions.
(4) Immediately upon moving into the area, tanks are dispersed,
security is established, vehicles concealed, and necessary
maintenance performed .
(5) In moving into an area at night, a guide must be provided
for each platoon . After a platoon reaches its position,
each tank must be guided to its place by the tank commander .
'6) The road must be cleared rapidly . Vehicles must not
jam on the road . Tracks into the area are brushed out to
prevent disclosure of the position to hostile aircraft . (See
FM 21-45.)
(7) Platoon leaders establish a platoon CP, and send a
runner to the company CP. The company commander reports
to or sends a runner to the battalion commander . The bugler
is used as a messenger .
36
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
25
472732 °-42-6 37
FIGURE 23 .-Post guides at entrance of assembly area to indicate platoon areas .
FIGURE 24 .-Do not move into assembly area and let crews remain idle .
N
Ul
xH
N
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
40
U
N
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
25-26
d . The attack position is as close to the line of departure as
is consistent with concealment . Here last-minute checks
are made and last-minute orders given . It is here that lastminute
coordination is made with infantry when tanks attack
through infantry .
∎ 26. FORMATION-4I . Figure 26 shows typical formations for
a tank attack . It should be noted that the diagrams show
only one formation for the platoons . These may be in any
prescribed combat formation such as line, wedge, column,
echelon, or line of section columns, depending upon terrain
and hostile dispositions .
1) The formation of three platoons in line is seldom use
It provides no reserve, is difficult to control, and has no
power for sustained effort . It may be used by a covering
force .
(2) The formation of two platoons in the assault is easier
to control than line formation and affords a reserve for influencing
the action, but has less sustaining power than
column formation . The support company is usually disposed
toward the exposed flank .
(3) Column formation affords maximum control and sustained
power . It is the formation for a penetration when
the company is not supported by another company . It has
the disadvantage of developing very little initial fire powei
(4) Another formation not shown in the diagram is one
platoon in assault and two platoons in reserve . This formation
is suitable when the situation is vague . Deployment to
right or left is facilitated .
b. During the approach to combat the company commander,
is at the head of his company . When the attack begins he
goes wherever he can best influence the action, He will
usually seek an observation point, probably close to the firing
positions of his tank platoon supporting the attack, from
which point he will be able to watch the attack of his
platoons . Here he controls by radio the maneuver of the
platoons and uses his reserve at the proper time. He should
not lead the initial attack unless such action is necessary
for psychological purposes . When he leads the attack lie will
become engaged in combat and will be unable to control his
company.
41
26
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
~- 800-YDS -+
0
0
0 0
0 0
0
00
0
300
600 YDS
0
0 0
0
0
TWO PLATOONS IN ASSAULT
700
1400 YOS
0
0
0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0 .~ 0 0
0
LINE
,_200-
400
YDS
0
0 0
0
0
0
00
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
COLUMN
400
1000 YDS
FicunE 28 .-Formations for attack . Platoons may be in line, wedge,
inverted wedge, column, line of section columns, or echelon,
42
I
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 26-27
FIGURE 27 .-Do not use so much smoke that maneuver of adjacent
units will be affected . Here smoke laid down by company hinders
movement of Company B . (See also fig . 28 .)
0 27. USE OF SMOKE.-a. Smoke is used by tank units to-
(1) Screen movement of tanks.
(2) Blind hostile observation .
(3) Neutralize hostile antitank guns .
(4) Confuse the enemy as to the real point of attack .
b. The use of smoke in any great quantity must be coordinated
by higher commanders . Even one mortar can, if there
is a cross wind, lay down a smoke screen that will hinder the
movement of adjacent friendly troops .
c. Each medium tank and each assault gun has a limited
number of rounds, usually five, of smoke ammunition . They
cannot lay down an extensive smoke screen . This ammunition
is used only for temporarily blinding observation of
antitank guns so the vehicle may close with the gun or move
to a more favorable position . The 81-mm mortar of the
tank battalions carries a preponderance of smoke ammunition.
Its high rate of fire, 30 rounds per minute, allows it
to lay down a heavy smoke screen in a short time . (See
FM 17-27.)
d, For screening small targets a cross wind is best, as only
one round if fired to windward will suffice for concealment .
43
21 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
44
conceal your own targets .
(See also fig . 30 .)
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
27
However, a cross wind will blow smoke into the zone of the
adjacent unit and fire must be controlled .
e . For screening an attack a wind blowing directly toward
the enemy position is best . Smoke laid in front of the enemy
position will drift to the rear and cover rear areas as front
areas become free for attack . CAUTION : Do not lay a smoke
screen when the wind is blowing from the enemy toward
you unless you desire to withdraw .
B
45
A rl
0
0
0
0
0
Q
FIGURE 29 .-Lay only enough smoke to
11 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
46
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
27
FIGVRE 31 .-Do not lay smoke that will come back on you . (See
also fig. 32 .)
47
27 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 33 .-Smoke laid with wind down range is most effective .
It continues to cover hostile rear installations . (See also fig . 34 .)
0
p 0
Wmd Due c t,on
0
27
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
50
r
G
L
P
e 28 . ATTACK FROM MARCH COLUMN .-a. When unexpectedly
attacked by the enemy or in a meeting engagement when time
is essential, attack may be made direct from march column .
with halt made only long enough to issue orders and perform
the minimum of reconnaissance.
b. If the column is unexpectedly attacked from the flank .
each platoon moves directly to the attack . It rallies on the
road or at such other place as the company commander may
direct by radio . The platoon leader gives his order for attack
by radio and at the first opportunity reports to the company
commander . When platoon leaders are at the head of the
company column they must, with all possible speed, return
to and assume command of their platoons .
0 c. Meeting engagement has been covered in advance guard
N
action (par . 20) .
d. When attacking unarmored troops, move quickly into
action, overrun and destroy the enemy .
e . When attacking armored troops from march column,
maneuver to bring maximum fire on a portion of the enemy,
N
while containing the remainder with a small force or blinding
0 m
him by use of smoke, Fire, if practicable, from concealed
positions with tank stationary. If you are caught in the
m M
open by heavier tanks with heavier weapons, use smoke on
w o
part of the enemy and close rapidly with the remainder . Unless
you can withdraw and lead the enemy tanks into the fire
of your own supporting medium tanks, your best chance is
to get to close range where your weapons will be effective,
Use maximum speed .
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
28
51
FIGURE 3g .-Do not keep units on road while reconnaissance is being made and orders are being issued Such inaction invites destruction by artillery fire . .
FIGURE 36 .--Move rapidly off road and prepare for action .
N
OD
N
28 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 37.In meeting engagement with armored troops do not rush
to meet enemy in frontal attack in open .
54
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
28
FIGURE 38 .-Maneuver to position where concentrated fire can be
brought on part of enemy . Detain rest of his forces by use of
smoke, It practicable .
55
29
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
∎ 29 . ATTACK OF POSITION .-a. Such attacks are preceded by
movement into assembly areas, reconnaissance, and movement
to attack positions . Such attacks may be penetrations
or envelopments . When one or both of the enemy's flanks
are open, envelopment is usual, Penetration is followed by
envelopment of the flanks created .
b . Attack of a position is characterized by coordination of
all fires, artillery, mortars, assault guns, supporting tanks,
and dive bombers. When the enemy position is held in
strength and is protected by mine fields, the infantry usually
attacks first, protected by artillery and mortar fire . When
mine fields or tank obstacles are to be removed, infantry and
engineers, protected by smoke and heavy artillery and machine-
gun fire, remove mines and make paths for the tanks .
The tanks then attack through the gaps created .
c. Tanks may attack ahead of infantry to break down wire
entanglements and destroy hostile automatic weapons,
d. Artillery fire must lift when tanks approach within 300
yards of its target . The protection afforded by the artillery
is taken over by the assault guns, mortars, and supporting
medium tanks. Economy of ammunition must always be
considered . Medium tanks and assault guns cannot lay down
sustained artillery fire .
56
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
57
29
30
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
N 30 . METHOD OF ADVANCE .-Advance is made by leapfrogging
or other means of fire and maneuver . (See fig . 40 .)
a, In the leapfrogging method of advance, the first platoon
covers the advance of the second and third platoons to their
next position and then moves around or through the second
platoon to its new position, which places the first platoon in
advance of the second platoon . The second platoon then
covers the advance of the first and third platoons to the next
position, The solid line indicates the direction of movement
of the first platoon, and the dotted line indicates the actual
route taken by the first platoon to reach its new position .
b . In moving by bounds, the first platoon covers the advance
of the second and third platoons to their next position, and
then moves to its new position . The operation is then repeated
. The use of this method always keeps the same platoons
in the forward positions .
58
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
LEAPFROGGING METHOD OF ADVANCE
IN THIS METHOD, REAR PLATOON MOVES BY BOUNDS
59
30
FrauaE 40.-Method of advance, One platoon covers the advance
of other platoons .
31
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 31, ATTACK WITH INFANTRY.a. The infantry may attack
ahead of the tanks, with the leading wave, or with the rear
echelon. It may be in carriers or dismounted, depending
upon the strength of the enemy . It must dismount when
taken under heavy enemy fire,
b. In a vague situation infantry will advance with a light
tank company, It will follow one of the tank platoons in
carriers until serious resistance is met . It may then be used
to form a base of fire for the tank attack ; to attack supported
by tank, mortar, and assault gun fire ; to destroy resistance
which cannot be reached by tanks ; to maneuver dismounted
to the flank to destroy enemy antitank guns holding up an
attack . There must be liaison between the tank company
commander and the infantry commander . The infantry platoon
commander has an SCR-510 radio set with which he
may communicate with the tank company commander .
Should he not have the proper crystals for this communication,
the tank company commander uses his own half-track
as a liaison vehicle, causing it to move with the infantry
platoon commander.
FIGuRE 41 .-Advance with infantry following in carriers . Situation
vague . (See also fig . 42 .)
60
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
61
Q;
a0
„
CD aN
cc
3vU
ato
N
CD
C
a)
W
31
331 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
62
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
32
fl 32. ACTION WHEN ENEMY LAYS DOWN SMOKE SCREEN-a . In
smoke or fog, tanks lose direction, may crash into each other,
and will be forced to slow down . Maintenance of direction
is difficult at best . The tank compass will be hard to see if
smoke gets into the tank.
b. When a tank platoon or company commander sees
that his unit is about to be smoked, he orders the tanks to
move at maximum speed to defilade positions . Some tanks
on the flanks dispose themselves to protect the flanks to
repel a counterattack that may be following the smoke
screen . All prepare immediately to resume the advance at
maximum speed when the smoke clears . The support platoon
and assault gun prepare for immediate resumption of
fire. These may be moved to a more favorable position to
bring fire on the enemy .
63
rn
CA
FIGURE 44 .-If smoke cloud hits you, do not move on through it.
FIGURE 45 .-If you continue, tanks will lose direction and antitank gunners will have good targets . wN
32
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
fib
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
33
•
33 . ATTACK OF ARTILLERY POSITION,-DO not attack artillery
frontally. Cover the artillery with machine-gun fire from
the front or flank and send platoons to the right and left .
Attack it from the flanks and rear and overrun the battery
position .
67
FIGURE 47.-Do not attack artillery frontally .
FIGURE 48 .--Cover artillery with fire and attack from flanks and rear .
w
Ui
FIGURE 49-Do not attack across mine field .
FIGURE 50 .--Go around nine field or have infantry and engineers clear path . ww
34
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
9 34 . ATTACK OF VILLAGES,-Avoid villages if practicable . If
the village must be taken, use infantry, engineers, mortars,
and assault gun to attack frontally while tanks encircle the
town.
72
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
34
73
34 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
74
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
35-38
• 35, ATTACK IN Woons.-To maintain control move through
woods in column . Beware of paths, as they will probably
be mined or covered with AT guns . If necessary have infantry
or other dismounted men precede tanks .
• 36 . ATTACK OF FORDS,-In attack of fords place tanks in
defiladed position to take defenders under fire and use infantry
to attack flank or rear .
• 37 . ATTACK OF RIVER LINE .-In the attack of a river line,
engineers, supported by artillery and some medium tanks
close to the river bank, ferry infantry and tank destroyer
units across . They then build the bridge . Medium tanks
supporting the crossing are disposed under cover or in defiladed
positions close to the river bank where they can give
close protection to the engineers,
r
L
a
a
1
~' Z
~ 1 0 p 0
FIGURE 53 .-Attack of ford .
SECTION VII
DEFENSE
• 38. GENERAL .-a. The tanks' offensive power must be used
in defense for counterattacks . They are not used as stationary
pill boxes except as a last r esort. FM 17-10 covers
in general the employment of armored units in defensive
combat.
75
38-41
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
b. In defense, infantry and engineers hold the main line
of resistance while tank units form the reserve for counterattacking
hostile forces preferably before they reach the
infantry lines .
• 39. DEFENSE OF A POSITION In defense of a position, the
tank company will normally operate as part of the battalion .
(See FM 17-33 .) Here it is used to attack as described in
section VI . In the defense, careful reconnaissance is made
of all terrain over which a counterattack might be made and
arrangements made with local infantry commanders for passage
of lines and coordination of fires .
• 40. WITHDRAWAL .-In withdrawal, tanks are used as counterattack
forces to make shallow attacks on a wide front to
slow up the enemy attack and permit friendly troops to withdraw
and reform . The company will usually be with the battalion
. In these attacks, the rallying point is normally
the attack or assembly position .
i 41. DELAYING AcTIoN .-Delaying action is similar to withdrawal,
the tanks being used to attack the heads and flanks
of hostile columns . In delaying action do not allow yourself
to become so heavily engaged as to be unable to withdraw .
FIGURE 54 .-Delaying action . Support attack of two platoons by one
platoon . One platoon then protects withdrawal of attacking
platoons .
76
THE TANK COMPANY, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
42-45
• 42. REAR GUARD .-Formations of the rear guard are the
same as the advance guard except in reverse order . The
rear guard may have to fight a delaying action . It can expect
no help from the main body .
SECTION VIII
JUNGLE WARFARE
∎ 43. GENERAL .-fl. FM 31-20 covers the general subject of
warfare in the jungle . In general, because of their sensitiveness
to terrain, tanks are unsuited for mass employment
in jungles . Their use in such operations will usually be limited
to groups of a company or less, supported by infantry .
A tank platoon might be attached to an infantry company .
b. Light tanks are more suited to jungle operation than
medium tanks.
c. Operation in jungles is usually confined to narrow
trails through dense growth relieved at intervals by open
spaces . Much of the trail may be swampy and require pioneer
work of considerable extent before the tanks can traverse
ft .
• 44. ATTAcx.-Infantry leads on the jungle trails, develops
the enemy, and the tanks then attack . Such operations are
a continuous series of small attacks ; at one time tanks lead
and the next, infantry .
• 45. DEFENSE. a. Infantry defends the trails by placing
antitank mines and machine guns to cover them . The open
spaces are covered by fire . The tanks are held in reserve
to counterattack if the enemy succeeds in reaching the open
space .
b. Tanks may be used to delay the enemy by turning the
turret guns to the rear and withdrawing from one vantage
point to another .
77
8
FM 17-33, Armored Force Field Manual : The
Armored Battalion, Light and Medium (Extract),
1942
WAR DEPARTMENT,
WASHINGTON, September 18, 1942
DISTRIBUTION :
D 2, 7 (5) ; D 17 (15) ; R and H 2, 7 (3) ; Bn and H 17
(5) ; IBn 2, 5-10 (3) ; C 17 (20) ; IC 2, 5-11 (3) .
(For explanation of symbols see FM 21-6 .)
11 III
FM 17-33, Armored Force Field Manual, The Armored
Battalion, Light and Medium, is published for the Information
and guidance of all concerned .
[A . G . 062 .11 (8-20-42),[
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraphs Page
SEcrION I, General 1-4 1
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR : II . Training 5-9 4
0. C. MARSHALL, III . Control, orders, liaison, reconnaissance,
maintenance, evacuation 10-16 12
Chief of Staff . IV . Marches and bivouac 16-21 21
V. Security 22-27 31
OFFICIAL : VI . Offensive action 28-39 57
J . A. ULIO, VII . Defensive action 40-43 113
Major General, VIII . Special operation 44-48 122
INDEX 135
The Adjutant General .
ON 4AINT
I
T
¶
f
0
l:L
D
D
1I
SECOND IN COMMAND
PLATOON LEADER
COMPANY COMMANDER
BATTALION COMMANDER
TANK
TANK, SHOWING DIRECTION
HALFLTRACK,CAR OR CARRIER (OF ARMORED UNITS)
HALF •T RACK,CAR,On CARRIER (OF INFANTRY UNITS)
® MORTAR CARRIER
~} ASSAULT GUN
AMMUNITION CARRIER
I/TON TRUCK
MOTORCYCLE
DESTROYED AT GUN
BN MAINT CREW, MAINT Ca, ARMORED REGT
UNIT TRAINS, ECHELON A
Key to symbols used in this manual .
Iv
OF TURRET GUN
1
FM 17-33
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
THE ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
SECTION I
GENERAL
• 1. SCOPE AND PURPOSE-a . This manual covers the tactical
employment of the light and medium tank battalions both
as. part of a larger force and when acting independently . It
is designed as a guide only and does not lay down a set of
inflexible rules . Each tactical situation must be solved on
its own merits and the initiative of individual commanders
must be encouraged .
b. Although not written specifically for the separate tank
battalions, the fundamentals covered herein and formations
shown are generally applicable to those units.
• 2. ORGANIZATION.-a. Armored battalion.-The armored
battalion has a headquarters and headquarters company and
three tank companies . For details of organization see current
Tables of Organization.
b. Separate tank battalion.-The separate tank battalion
is similar in organization to the armored battalion except that
a service company is added for administrative purposes and
for maintenance .
c. Headquarters and headquarters company .-The headquarters
and headquarters company consists of a battalion
headquarters and a headquarters company . The headquarters
company is further divided into company headquarters,
an assault gun platoon, and a mortar platoon . The company
has a small maintenance section for maintenance of company
equipment only . Figures 1 and 2 show in chart form the
organization of the company. A small reconnaissance platoon
is provided for the battalion headquarters .
•
3. FUNDAMENTALS-a . The tank battalion operates by surprise,
fire and maneuver, and concentration of effort (mass) .
(1) Surprise is obtained by speed of maneuver, use of cover
and concealment, striking at an unexpected time in an unexN
C4
SGT GUN COMDR
2GUNNERS
DRIVER
DRIVER
2 AM CARVERS
BASIC
SGT GUN COMOR
2GUNNERS
DRIVER
HQ COMPANY
ARMORED BATTALION.LIGHT
STF SGT-COM
AGENT MSGR
CHAUFFEUR
ZGUN~COMOR
DRIVER
SAM CARRIERS
BASIC
DRIVER
FIGURE 1 .-Headquarters and headquarters company, armored battalion, light. (The medium battalion
headquarters company Is similar in organization .)
BATTALION HEADQUARTERS
ARMORED BATTALION,LUGHT
"1, . ~i 'iii ^Ae
MSGR
MSGR
LN 0-COM 0
WO-ASST.COM 0 S-3 (AIR)
TECH
CHAUFSFEUR
CHAUFFEUR
E SFGT S 3
MSGR
MSGR RCN CPL
RCN SGT
RCN CPL
RON SGT
RCN AGENT RCN AGENT RCN AGENT RCN AGENT
CHAUFFEUR CHAUFFEUR CHAUFFEUR CHAUFFEUR
leima -
(ARTY OSSR)
(S-2-3)
CPL-TK COMDR
CPL TK COMDR
GUNNER-RADIO TENDER
RADIO OPERATOR-GUNNER
DRIVER
DRIVER
PLAT SGT 0 RADIO TENDER
DRIVER
MAINTENANCE
STF.SGT-MA Y(f M
OSECTION -
MECHAMC
NO ASST MART 0
CHAUFFEUR CPMLE-CMHATNRI C$UP
DRIVER
O
(ON C O )
LT-Cof TK SEC-LN 0
CPL-TK COMDR
RADIO OPERATOR-GUNNER
DRIVER
MORT PLAT
HO SEC
ON CO
S-2-3
2GUNNERS MG
2 RADIO OPERATORS
38ASICS
DRIVER
ON RON
PLATOON
PLAT C 0
PLAT SGT
4 RCN AGENTS
RADIO TENDER
DRIVER
TANK
SECTION
FIGURE 2-Headquarters, armored battalion, light . (The medium battalion headquarters is similar in
organization .)
W
Ci ar
0
w
3-5
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
petted direction, and by deceiving the enemy as to the true
point of the main attack .
(2) Fire and maneuver is a fundamental of all tactical
employment. Part of the battalion supports by fire the
maneuver of the remainder . This fundamental is applicable
down to and including the tank section .
(3) Concentration of effort must be made on critical areas .
Do not disperse the command by making simultaneous attacks
on widely dispersed objectives. Such action is ineffective,
wastes effort, and usually leads to failure .
b . The characteristics of the different type 'tanks dictate
their employment .
(1) The light tanks are used-
(a) To feel out weak points in enemy resistance .
(b) To screen the advance when the situation is vague .
(c) As a fast maneuvering force to attack the enemy flank
or rear or to exploit a success .
(d) To draw the enemy into prepared traps .
(e) As advance, flank, or rear guards.
(f) On terrain impassable for medium tanks .
(2) The medium tanks are used-
(a) As the leading wave or echelon of attack against known
enemy resistance when the antitank defense is strong .
(b) To support by fire the advance of light tanks, other
medium tanks, or infantry in tank versus tank action,
∎ 4 . INFLUENCE OF TERRAIN In any plan for employment of
tanks, the influence of terrain must be carefully analyzed .
(See FM 17-10 .) Tanks are extremely sensitive to terrain
and, many times, infantry must attack to secure ground
from which the tank attack may be launched . However, do
not dismiss the possibility of the use of difficult terrain . The
surprise gained may be worth the labor of traversing it .
SECTION II
TRAINING
∎ 5 . GENERAL .--a . The subject of training is covered generally
in FM 21-5 . The battalion may operate alone, as part of a
regiment, as part of a combat command, and as the division
reserve . It will normally be reinforced. It is essential that
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 3-Surprise is gained by rapidity of movement, use of concealed
approaches . Do not move across open spaces when cover
is available .
5
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 4,-Advance without fire support will lead to disaster .
6
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
7
5
FIGURE 5 .-Use available supporting weapons . Use one company to
support attack by fire . Companies also use fire and maneuver in
their advance . Smoke antitank guns or fire on them with assauir
guns .
5
w
to
5000 YDS
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
w
8
W
FmuRE 8 .Do not disperse the battalion .
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 5
w w
W
U U
FIGuaE 7 .-Mass effort on one objective, take it and others will fall .
Block enemy observation by smoke, if practicable .
9
bat and their success or failures may be directly traceable to
their teaching. Have parts of problem repeated as necessary
.
• 8. COMBINED TRAINING .-Whenever practicable, hold combined
training exercises with artillery, engineers, infantry,
tank destroyer units, and air units . In any case the battalion
medical detachment and the battalion section of the
maintenance company should be present.
• 9. SUPPLY, MAINTENANCE, AND EVACUATION .-DO not forget
the supply, maintenance, and medical functions in keeping
the battalion in operation. Think of these in planning exercises
. Require the staff officers concerned to make plans and
require execution of such plans . (See FM 101-5.)
SECTION III
CONTROL, ORDERS, LIAISON, RECONNAISSANCE,
MAINTENANCE, EVACUATION
1 10 . CONTROL, Control as discussed herein consists of both
tactical and fire .
a . Tactical .-Control once lost is difficult to regain. It is •
therefore imperative that the battalion commander use every
means within his power to insure adequate control of his
battalion at all times. Control is exercised by-
(1) Giving clear definite orders as to formations, zones,
lines of departure, axis of advance, phase lines, attack positions,
objectives, and rallying points. (See s ec. VI .) It is
not sufficient merely to give these orders ; the battalion
commander must allow time for lower commanders to transmit
these orders to all personnel and must assure himself
that this is done. The most brilliantly conceived plan is
likely to fail if it is not properly transmitted to the troops
and if execution of it is not supervised . Plan, order, supervise .
(2) Radio .
(3) Messenger .
(4) Signals.
12
reconnaissance platoon, assault gun platoon leader, mortar
platoon leader, artillery forward observer, and headquarters
company commander. By switching of crystals, attached
units may be placed on the battalion command frequency .
See figure 8 for battalion radio net.
(b) The use of radio must be kept to the minimum . Messages
must be brief . Do not send messages in the clear that
will disclose information upon which the enemy will have
time to act. Commanders habitually use the radio themselves
.
(o) On the march, radio is usually silent although receivers
are turned on and all except a small number used for
other purposes are set on the battalion net. Radios must be
silent at least 1/2 hour before reaching bivouac. They must
be silent in bivouac,
b . Fire .-The control of the fire of a tank battalion
with its supporting weapons and reinforcements is an extremely
difficult task., The battalion commander must rely
to a great extent upon mission-type fire orders as control
of individual weapons is impracticable . In general, the battaliori'commander
controls fire initially by giving targets to
supporting weapons and zones of action for his leading companies
: During action, the battalion commander by means
of radio or by oral order when practicable gives fire missions
to his battalion .
(1) Initial,-(a) Leading companies .-Leading companies
are given a direction of attack or'zone of action . The locations'of
any known hostile targets are designated to the company
commander and the company commander is then left
free to control the fire of'his company .
(b)' Reserve company.-Part 'or all of the reserve company
may be given an initial mission of supporting the leading
companies by *fire .' Known targets 'are pointed out to the
platoon or company commander and a time for opening fire
designated. If location of targets, such; an antitank guns, is
not definitely known, the reserve company or its platoons is
given the mission of firing on targets as they appear . Each
480800°-42-2
13
7-10 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
10
(6) After the exercise, hold a critique ; emphasize lessons (5) For radio communication within the company see FM
learned. Comment on poor solutions and point out a correct 17-32 .
solution.
solutions .
Commend good solutions but do not ridicule poor
Remember the men are being prepared for com-
(a)
with
The battalion commander has radio communication
higher-unit headquarters, his company commanders,
10
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
platoon will be given the mission of supporting a particular
leading company, to protect a flank, or to cover a particular
zone.
(c) Assault gun platoon.-Initially the assault gun platoon,
except when the zone is extremely wide, remains under the
direct control of the battalion commander . The platoon
leader is directed to fire on designated targets if any suitable
targets are known . Otherwise, he places his guns in position
and is directed to fire on targets as they appear .
(d) Mortar platoon.-Initially fire control of the mortar
platoon is the same as for the assault gun platoon . It may
be given smoke missions . (See FM 17-27.)
(e) Supporting tank company or platoon. -A supporting
tank company or platoon is controlled the same as the battalion
reserve .
(f) Supporting infantry .-Supporting infantry is normally
used as a base of fire for the maneuver of the battalion . As
such it is given a mission and fire control left to the unit
commander. (See FM 17-40 and 17-42.)
(g) Artillery,-The battalion commander through his artillery
forward observer calls for such fires as he deems necessary.
(For fire control and coordination see FM 17-62 .)
(2) During action, (a) Leading companies.-Company
commanders control their companies . The battalion commander
gives orders for movements . Rarely will he give
orders for a company to place its fire on any particular target .
He may order the company commander to assist an adjacent
company- but actual fire control is left to the company
commander.
(b) Reserve company.-As the attack progresses the battalion
commander, by radio or personal contact with the
reserve company commander, orders supporting fires for lead-
Ing companies . In this connection, the platoons of the reserve
company may be placed on the battalion command frequency
so fire orders can be given without undue delay .
When the reserve company acts as a unit for maneuver the
company net is re-formed .
(c) Assault gun platoon .-By radio the battalion commander
orders the assault gun platoon to fire on targets as
desired. The assault gun platoon commander must not wait
for orders to fire on targets of opportunity, (See FM 17-25 .)
14
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
10-13
(d) Mortar platoon.-By radio or signal the battalion commander
directs the mortar platoon leader to fire on targets
as they appear or place smoke as needed . (See FM 17-27.)
(e) Supporting tanks.-These are controlled the same as
the reserve company .
(f) Infantry .-As Infantry is needed to reduce resistance
which tanks cannot reach, the battalion commander orders its
use tactically but does not attempt to control the fire .
(g) Artillery .-Through his artillery forward observer the
battalion commander calls for fires as needed . Should this
observer become a casualty the battalion commander, his
5-2-3, or his company commanders and platoon commanders
of the battalion adjust artillery fire .
(3) Adjustment of fire,For maintaining control and obtaining
faster adjustment of fire the battalion commander
may use his S-2-3 to control a part of the fire support. Thus
this officer may direct the fire of the assault guns or mortars
in accordance with the battalion commander's wishes .
c . Signals .-Signals are covered in FM 17-5 . Because of
the distance involved the battalion commander will rarely use
visual signals .
i 11 . ORDERS.-a. Orders are oral or in written message form
and frequently fragmentary . They must be brief, clear, and
when practicable, given at a point from which as much as
possible of the terrain over which the operation is to take
place, can be seen . Full use should be made of marked maps,
aerial photographs, and overlays .
b, The form for a field order is given in FM 101-5 .
9 12 . LIAIs0N.-The battalion commander maintains liaison
with the regiment or combat command by means of a
liaison offcer . This officer should know the battalion plan
of action. He may be used to deliver orders to the battalion
but he should not be used for messenger service . Duties of
liaison officers are prescribed In FM 101-5 .
0 13 . RECONNAISSANCE-Reconnaissance is covered in detail
in FM 17-10, 17-20, 17-22, and 17-32 .
a. The tank battalion has a small reconnaissance platoon
mounted in a half-track vehicle and four 1/4-ton trucks. This
platoon is used on the march for making short reconnaissance
15
13
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
v
REGT eY
CO COMBAT
COMMAND
FIGURE 8 . Battalion radio net .
16
I
°mar
ON IMI
OSCCRR- 9- 3
SCR- 2B:-:13 SCTRO-T5A5L8 --2772
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
13-14
trips to the right and left of the line of march, or to reconnoiter
to the front when the battalion is acting alone, or is
acting as an advance guard for a larger force . In assembly
areas and rallying points it is used for close reconnaissance
missions . Before combat the platoon assists the battalion
commander in reconnaissance of the area of employment .
During combat it follows the reserve company, performs
reconnaissance missions to the flanks, or may be used to
maintain liaison with adjacent units, When the battalion
is in the leading echelon of an attack, the reconnaissance
platoon usually follows the second echelon and rejoins the
battalion at the rallying point .
b. The battalion commander and his staff must make personal
reconnaissance for employment of the battalion . This
includes reconnaissance of both terrain and enemy positions .
∎ 14. MAINTENANCE .-Employment of company maintenance
sections is covered in FM 17-32 .
a. The battalion has no maintenance personnel except for
its own battalion headquarters and headquarters company
vehicles . During operations a battalion maintenance section
of the regimental maintenance company is attached to, or
supports, the battalion . It moves with the battalion and
reinforces the company maintenance sections . This section
accompanies the battalion to the assembly area and attack
positions where it assists in making final adjustments on
vehicles . During combat it follows the battalion as closely
as practicable, along the battalion axis of maintenance designated
by the battalion commander . It seeks disabled vehicles,
reinforces company maintenance sections, and reports
to the regiment, or to the maintenance battalion personnel
with the combat command, the location of any vehicles which
are disabled beyond the capability of the section to repair .
If time permits, an estimate of the extent of the damage
should be transmitted at the same time . The maintenance
section should rejoin the battalion at the rallying point where
it will assist the company maintenance sections . (See FM
17-50 .)
b. During a penetration when the battalion is the first
echelon of attack, maintenance personnel usually follow the
second echelon of attack .
17
NO CO C D
iiiiIIIIII
J SCSRU-M5M0A6R-Y I
~ sy
- - -R O-N
SCR-508- 5
14 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
1 8
FIGURE 9 .-On the march, when the battalion is in the main body,
use reconnaissance platoon and motorcyclists to reconnoiter short
distances to the flanks .
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 10-In assembly area, attack positions, and rallying points,
Use reconnaissance platoon to observe and to make additional
reconnaissance .
19
14
14 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 11 .-During combat, use platoon for reconnaissance to flanks
or to maintain contact with adjacent units .
2 0
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
1,i-17
• 15 . EVACUATION .-The evacuation of wounded from armored
units is covered in detail in FM 17-50 and 8-5 .
The battalion section of the regimental medical detachment
marches at the rear of the battalion on the march . It accompanies
the battalion to the attack position . During combat
it moves forward with the maintenance, cares for wounded,
and joins the battalion at the rallying point .
SECTION IV
MARCHES AND BIVOUAC
•
16 . GENERAL .-The subject of marches is covered in detail
in FM 25-10, 17-10, and 17-50 .
a. A successful march is one that places the troops and
equipment at their destination at the proper time and in
proper condition to fight . A successful march depends upon
good march discipline . This can be obtained only by thorough
training in march procedure and rigid enforcement of
march rules .
b. The rate of march of a column containing medium tanks
does not exceed 17 miles per hour . This rate may be increased
for short periods for columns which do not contain
medium tanks . However, it must be borne in mind that an
increase of rate of march above 17 miles per hour for extended
periods will cause an exorbitant increase in maintenance
needs .
c . For detailed discussion of distances between vehicles see
FM 25-10 . Ordinarily distances will be not less than 50 yards
and usually will be approximately 90 yards . At times they
may be as great as 0 .1 mile. Movement by infiltration is
discussed in FM 25-10 and 17-50 .
• 17. MARCH PLANS AND ORDERS-The march order for a battalion
is oral, supplemented by sketches or marked maps of
the route. Each vehicle commander and each driver should
know the route and when practicable be given a sketch of the
route . For form for a march order see FM 101-5 .
a . Warning orders.-Warning orders should be issued far
enough in advance of the time set for departure so that proper
preparations for the march may be made . These preparations
will depend upon the situation as to supply and state of
maintenance . A well-trained battalion should be able to
21
25
0
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
ENEMY
RECONNAISSANCE PATROLS
RECONNAISSANCE
PATROLS
OUTPOST
. LINE h
' 2 MEN AT EACH
OUTPOST REQUIRES
ABOUT 128 MEN
LOCAL
// JCDJ
SECURITY
/ , . .
\
1000 YOS / CD
\~
~IATCHO)
I
\
\ tC:DJ /
/
.
100 YDS
•.
•
56
S
S
FIGURE 36 .-One form of outpost in open terrain with no natural
obstacles available .
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
25-28
individual arms, machine guns, and 37-mm tank guns . The
75-mm gun may be used at times . For low-flying attack the
guns must be trained on the point of probable appearance of
the airplanes . There will be no time to shift after the airplanes
appear . Have all receivers on battalion frequency so
air alert warning can be transmitted quickly .
(4) At temporary halts, move under concealment and
brush out tracks . If concealment from observation is not
available, move off road and disperse, if possible . Dig slit
trenches at long halts . If vehicles are concealed, do not fire
at airplanes unless attacked .
b . In bivouac.-(1) Air security in bivouac, assembly areas,
and rallying points is obtained primarily by concealment and
dispersion . Air sentries are detailed. Use standard air
alarms. Keep one battalion radio receiver on reconnaissance
unit frequency so early warning of approach of airplanes may
be obtained .
(2) Brush out all tracks (see fig . 40) .
(3) Enforce rigid camouflage discipline . Dig slit trenches .
Prohibit unshielded lights .
(4) Do not fire at airplanes unless attacked.
• 26. IN+A5SEMBLY AREA AND AT RALLYING POINT.-a. At assembly
area and rallying point make use of available cover
and concealment. Post local security .
b . At rallying point, first unit to arrive posts weapons to
cover favorable avenues of approach . Post observation. As
more units arrive, the battalion commander posts more security
details and then reorganizes his battalion .
c . Use available tank destroyer elements to assist in protection
. (See FM 18-5 .)
•
27. AGAINST CHEMICAL ATTACK,-See FM 17-10 and 21-40 .
SECTION VI
OFFENSIVE ACTION
128. GENERAL .-For fundamentals of offensive action see
paragraph 3, and FM 100-5 and 17-10 . The missions of
echelons of attack are as follows (see FM 17-100) ;
a. The combat command or armored regiment will usually
attack in three echelons . The light or medium armored
57
FIGURE 37-This column was not alert . Hostile airplanes attacked over woods in rear . Vehicles closed
up at bottom of hill and made a perfect target . BEWARE OF DEFILES .
FIGURE 38-Here some guns pointed to rear and covered woods . Vehicles are properly spaced . This
column was alert.
N
Co
zaar
N
00
9
a, m0
00 0
63
N
FIGURE 39 .-Tracks here disclosed the position of the vehicles . Also vehicles were not dispersed . Slit
trenches had not been dug .
FicuaE 40 .-Brush out tracks, disperse vehicles, dig slit trenches .
N
CO
N
CO
FIGURE 41 .-Vehicles closed up at halt and stayed on road . They make an excellent target .
FIGURE 42 .--Move off the road if practicable . Disperse . If possible, always halt in a shadow . If It
is impossible to move off the road, keep some weapons manned and ready to fire . Cover all directions
.
Nco
N00
FIGURE 43.-Here advantage was not taken of cover . This invites disaster,
FIGURE 44 .-Advantage was taken of available concealment here .
aJ
00
N
CO
28-29
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
battalion may be in any of these echelons . Each echelon
attacks in a series of waves using fire and maneuver .
(1) First echelon-The mission of the first echelon of
attack is to destroy enemy antitank defenses, artillery, command
posts, and other rear installations . It pays little
attention to personnel other than that operating antitank
weapons and artillery, command post personnel, or reserves
in assembly areas .
(2) Second echelon-The mission of the second echelon
of attack is to destroy infantry with its weapons, especially
machine guns . It destroys antitank guns passed over by the
leading echelon and also command posts, communication
centers, reserves, and rear installations .
(3) Third echelon.-The third echelon of attack advances
with the infantry and destroys enemy personnel, machine
guns, and installations holding up the infantry .
b. It must not be assumed that the tanks will always attack
first . Many times infantry will attack to secure ground from
which a tank attack may be launched or in conjunction with
engineers, to remove or clear paths through obstacles .
If 29. FORMATIONS, FRONTAGES, AND DEPTHS . -Formations,
frontages, and depths will depend upon the mission, terrain,
enemy situation, and supporting fires . For type formations
see figure 46 . Companies may be in any suitable formation .
(See FM 17-32 .)
a. Frontage.-(1) Wide frontage may be taken on a covering
mission while a penetration calls for narrow frontage and
great depth to give sustaining power to carry the action
through to a successful conclusion .
(2) A narrow frontage to facilitate control is taken in
wooded terrain . Impassable ground may narrow the formation,
(See fig . 47 .) In open terrain, wider frontages than
for wooded terrain are practicable and desirable .
(3) When enemy has few antitank guns and his other antitank
defensives are light a wide frontage may be taken . If
enemy antitank defenses are strong and cannot be avoided, a
narrow frontage and formation in great depth is taken .
(4) When well supported by artillery and bombardment
aviation, the frontage may be greater than when such support
is light or lacking . In the latter cases, the tanks must
furnish their own supporting fires .
6 6
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND-MEDIUM
67
29
FIGURE 4S .-Echelons of attack . Distances are not fixed but will
depend upon terrain and the enemy .
29
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
d
(3) The reserve is usually located behind the company
making the main effort . It moves from firing position to
firing position to give continuous support to the leading companies,
It is prepared to repel counterattacks from the flank
or to pass through a depleted leading company and continue
the attack.
(4) Unless an extremely wide front is covered, the mortar
platoon and the assault gun platoon should be retained under
battalion control .
c . Wedge,-This formation is used in advancing against an
enemy whose defenses have not been definitely located. The
leading company covers the advance of the other two companies
. These companies In turn protect the flanks, give fire
support to the leading company, and are prepared to maneuver
to either flank. Mortars and assault guns may be attached
to the leading company.
d. Column.-Column gives maximum control and driving
power . The battalion may be quickly developed to either
flank . The formation is useful in passing through woods .
It may have to be used in passing a defile . It is the best
formation for a penetration when the battalion is acting
alone . For the initial advance against light enemy resistance,
the leading company will usually cover a broad front,
e . Echelon.-The battalion may be echeloned either to the
right or left . Such formations are useful for a flank battalion
as it gives great flank protection by favoring rapid deployment
to the exposed flank . Assault guns and mortars may
be attached to companies .
f. Line.-This is a rare formation as it provides little depth
and consequently low sustaining power . Its use is confined
to screening or counterreconnaissance missions . Assault guns
and mortars should be attached to companies .
68
1=1
+200-900 YDS-+
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
1400-2500 YDS-'
900-
YDS
2000
4-81 MMI
lol
INVERTED WEDGE
lc:)]
475 SP
753P 1000-
. . .
YDS
4500
COLUMN
4-81MM
F=7(-)
4-81 MM
750-3500 YDS
161
MM
600- 3500 YOS
11 1
0
(-)
*8I MM
LINE
69
76
ECHELON
WEDGE
4(-) 75 SP
4 75 SP
101
1 1000 YDS
1014500
29
475 SP
1.r86714 1 1
FIGURE 46 .-Schematic formations for an armored battalion,
. nvere wege.-This formation is suitable for any
echelon of attack. It provides strong fire power to the front,
flank protection, fire support, and a reserve to influence the 400- 2 500 YDS
action . i
(1) Frontage in this formation will rarely exceed 1,500
yards . 11
(2) The depth of the formation depends upon the terrain,
mission, and fire support of other units . •
lO) . . .
29 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 47 .-Influence of terrain on formations .
70
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
29-31
g. Other formations There are other formations or modifications
of the above formations that may be used to meet a
particular tactical situation. For example, in the echelon
formation the rear company may follow in the trace of the
center company,
0 30. BATTALION HEADQUARTERS (see FM 17-10) .-a. In the approach
to combat and in combat, the battalion has with it only
those individuals and veh :cles necessary for the control, maintenance,
and evacuation of the battalion and for supply of the
battalion in the assembly position . All supply vehicles-gasoline,
ammunition, equipment, and kitchen trucks if with the
column-are left at the assembly position to be moved forward
as directed by the regimental or combat command commander.
Personnel sections are with the regimental, combat
command, or division trains .
b. The forward echelon of battalion headquarters (see FM
17-10) moves with the battalion to the attack position. During
combat the battalion commander, the S-2-3, and the artillery
forward observer move forward with the battalion, the
headquarters commandant remains at the attack position
with the battalion headquarters maintenance section, attached
battalion maintenance section, battalion medical detachment,
and such other vehicles and personnel as the battalion
commander may direct . The actions of maintenance
and medical personnel are covered in section III . The headquarters
commandant moves this group forward as directed
by the battalion commander . In a penetration this group
will follow the second or third echelon of attack .
0 31. SUPPORTING FIRES.-a. Artillery (see FM 17-60) .-The
artillery gives close support to the attack in all stages . (See
FM 17-10.) An artillery forward observer, mounted in a tank,
advances behind the leading waves of tanks . This officer has
direct radio communication with the supporting artillery battalion
and the tank battalion commander. Other artillery
officers usually will be forward to conduct fire of individual
battefles as may be necessary, but these will not be in the radio
net of the tank battalion commander.
(1) The tank battalion commander may expect from the
artillery-
71
31
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
(a) Firing of concentrations to cover development for an
attack.
(b) Assistance in security of assembly area by placing concentrations
on avenues of approach for hostile troops,
(c) Assistance in protection of the rallying point by fires as
necessary on threatening hostile elements, and by counterbattery
fire .
(d) Support of initial attack by fires on hostile front line
installations, antitank guns, observation posts, and artillery.
Targets must not be closer than 300 yards to friendly troops .
An area 200 yards wide and 200 yards deep can be effectively
covered by one battery .
(e) Continuing support as attack progresses by concentrations
on hostile troops and weapons holding up the attack .
(J) Screening, by smoke, of hostile antitank guns and
observation points .
(g) Assistance in breaking up hostile counterattacks, including
hostile armored threats from the flanks .
(h) Destruction of road blocks and troops defending them .
(2) The battalion commander should not expect the
artillery to-
(a) Fire a long preparation before the attack, unless special
arrangements have been made for dumping additional ammunition
at the guns .
(b) Fire concentrations on unimportant targets or targets
which the tanks themselves may overcome without excessive
danger .
(c) Fire at targets that can be neutralized more quickly by
assault guns, mortars, or tank weapons . Small targets close
to the leading tanks and positively located can usually be
eliminated quickly without calling for an artillery concentration
.
(d) Blast extensive passageways through mine fields .
(3) Each officer must know how to call for and adjust artillery
fire. (See FM 17-62.) Radio nets should be set up so
that each tank company commander, if necessary, can tune
into the artillery net . The company commander needing
artillery support first calls his battalion commander on the
radio, gives location and type of target, and requests fire .
The battalion commander turns the fire mission over to the
72
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
73
31
Ftcosa 48-Do not call for artillery fire on unimportant missions.
Here valuable ammunition is wasted on a machine gun that the
tanks themselves can easily overcome .
31 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
Ficuae 49-Save artillery for Important targets such as groups of
antitank guns .
7 4
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
31
artillery forward observer . If the observer is not in a position
to direct the fire and cannot move quickly to such position,
he may so state and the battalion commander gives the
company commander authority to adjust fire . If the artillery
forward observer should become a casualty, either the
battalion commander or the company commander may
adjust fire .
(4) In order that all officers may be able to adjust fire, the
battalion commander in his attack order designates a series
of check points and easily identifiable terrain features, and
numbers them consecutively in the direction of advance . To
distinguish check points for the various artillery battalions,
the check points for the lower numbered artillery battalion
begins with 100, the next higher 200, and the highest number
300. Company commanders number these check points on
their maps .
b . Air support,-(1) Air bombardment is used to supplement
artillery fires and to attack targets beyond the range of
artillery. The use of air bombardment should be coordinated
with artillery fire .
(2) The battalion commander has on his staff an officer
called the S-3 for air . When the battalion is making the
main effort or is the first echelon of attack this officer is
mounted in a half-track vehicle, equipped with long-range
radio, from the division signal company .
(3) Should air support be needed and the signal company
long-range radio is not available, the battalion commander
may arrange through his regiment or the combat command
for air support .
(4) If air support is desired, ask for it at the earliest practicable
moment . It takes time to get the planes to the right
place .
c . Mortar fires For employment of mortars see FM 17-27,
The mortars should be retained under battalion control when
the attack is on a narrow front. When the front becomes so
wide that mortar support cannot be given leading companies
by retention under battalion control, attach them to companies
.
d . Assault gun,-For employment of the assault gun platoon
see FM 17-25 . The same principle of attachment which
75
31-33
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
governs the mortar platoon also governs the assault gun
platoon.
e. Supporting tanks.-Medium tanks from another battalion
may be used to support the attack either by direct or
indirect fire . The reserve company should be used to support
the attack by fire . Do not attempt to lay down extensive
artillery preparations with the medium tanks ; the ammunition
carried will not permit such action . (See FM 17-32 .)
f . Infantry weapons.-When attacking with infantry, the
infantry weapons are used to give fire support for the tanks .
(See par. 32 and FM 17-10, 17-40, and 17-42 .)
∎ 32 . COORDINATION .-Careful planning, perfect coordination
and timing, and vigorous execution are essentials of a successful
attack . The effect of all elements-tanks, infantry,
artillery, and air-must be coordinated .
a . In a meeting engagement coordination is difficult. (See
par . 34 .) However, in an attack from assembly position on
an enemy whose location has been determined, the maximum
of coordination must be attained .
b . Coordination is obtained by explicit orders, designation
of time or signal for attack, and designation of a line or lines
of departure . Commanders concerned or their staff officers
must confer and make certain that each knows what, when .
where, and how he is to operate.
c. The regimental or combat command commander is responsible
for coordination of the attack as a whole . However,
the battalion commander must confer with the infantry
commander, the artillery commander or his liaison officer, and
the commander of supporting tanks . He makes all necessary
arrangements to insure that each knows what the other is to
do . He arranges for special signals and for any special radio
communication . This information must be passed on to the
lower units .
∎ 33 . POSITIONS .-Locations or positions which must be understood
by all are the assembly position, attack position,
rallying point, and alternate rallying point. In addition
separate tank battalions may use an intermediate position .
(See fg . 49 and FM 17-10 .)
76
ARMORED BATTALION,' LIGHT AND MEDIUM
33
a. The assembly position (area) should afford concealment
and is preferably beyond the range of hostile medium artillery
fire, usually about 8,000 to 9,000 yards from the line of
departure. If such assembly position would cause the battalion
to move through a defile to reach attack positions, then
select an assembly position in front of the defiles or cause
several passages to be constructed through the obstacle .
(See fig. 50 .) In assembly areas, post security, check vehicles
and weapons. Get everything ready for the attack .
b. An intermediate position may be designated if the assembly
position is a great distance from attack positions .
This is in fact a forward assembly position and should have
the same characteristics as the assembly position .
c. The attack position is as near the, line of departure as
practicable, considering concealment . There will be an attack
position for cach company or platoon . Halts are made
only long enough to regain control, for last minute coordination
with other troops, especially infantry if the attack is
made through or in conjunction with infantry . Before reaching
the attack position, assume a deployed or semideployed
formation . Take up the formation with which the line of
departure is to be -passed .
d., The rallying point is a well-defned terrain feature at
which the tanks assemble after reaching their objective . It is
usually in rear of (on the friendly side of) the fnal objective .
(See fig . 52 .) It should afford concealment and take advantage
of natural obstacles for security. Here the battalion
reorganizes, resupplies as necessary, takes care of wounded,
and prepares for further action. Alternate rallying points
are designated in case the rallying point is untenable or
cannot be attained. The attack position may be designated as
an alternate rallying point. There should be a rallying point
and an alternate rallying point for each objective . Do not
stop to reorganize on each objective . If the going is good
keep going to the final objective, then reorganize . Keep control
by observation of advance and issuance of necessary
coordinating orders .
480600°--43-8 77
33 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
ENEMY (=:)OBJECTIVE
c:::)
0
0
RALLYING POINT
LD
LD
ATTACK POSITION
ALSO ALTERNATE
RALLYING POINT
'-```
RARELY USED BY THE 1
ARMORED BATTALION)
moo
If
00
`
(SEPARATE TANK BATTALION,
INTERMEDIATE POSITION
ASSEMBLY AREA
(SHOULD BE OUT OF RANGE
OF HOSTILE MEDIUM ARTY
FIRE)
FIGURE 50 .-Armored battalion Installations.
78
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 33
FIGURE 51 .-Do not select assembly area with defiles in front that
can be blocked by artillery . Move forward through defiles before
discovered by the enemy . Disperse to minimize losses .
79
33 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 52 .-Rallying point .
80
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM-
34
∎ 34. MEETING ENGAGEMENT.--a . A meeting engagement may
occur when the situation is obscure, such as the meeting of
small hostile units when reconnaissance is not effective . Again
it may occur when opponents are aware of each other's presence
but attack immediately to gain some tactical advantage .
(See FM 17-10 .) Advance guard action is an example of a
meeting engagement .
b . In order to secure tactical advantage in a meeting
engagement it is essential that orders be issued and action
initiated immediately. Commanders must be well forward .
Little time is spent on coordination of fires . Attack is
usually launched from march column . The mission of the
command will determine the action taken .
c. The following shows one form of action in a meeting
engagement :
(1) Situation,-(a) Combat command A, 60th Armored
Division, is marching west along state highway 59 with the
mission of destroying an enemy unarmed column reported
advancing on TETRA from the west. (See fig, 53 .)
(b) The 1st Battalion, 99th Armored Regiment, with one
company of infantry, one platoon of engineers, a heavy tank
destroyer platoon, a medium tank company, and one battery
of field artillery attached forms the advance guard .
(c) Reports from combat command reconnaissance units
indicate a Red force of infantry, artillery, and tanks is marching
from the west on TETRA . This force has brushed aside
our reconnnaissance units .
(d) At 10 :00 AM the point of the advance guard is as
shown in figure 53 . The battalion reconnaissance platoon
has reached DEAD MAN CREEK and has just reported that
enemy patrol of two armored cars is moving east on highway
59, leading car about 500 yards west of DEAD MAN
CREEK.
(e) At this time the advance guard commander, who is
immediately behind the advance party, receives the following
message from the combat command commander :
"Battalion of enemy light tanks followed by two batteries
of artillery and a regiment of infantry is moving east on highway
59, head of column 2 miles east of TETRA. Seize
81
34
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
PERRY ROAD RIDGE at once and cover the development
of the combat command."
(2) Actions and orders of battalion commander .-The
advance guard commander (battalion commander) immediately
gives orders as follows :
"Support commander, enemy tanks, artillery and infantry
moving east on highway 59, head of column 2 miles east of
TETRA. Move your company at maximum speed and cover
crossings of DEAD MAN CREEK .
"Artillery observer, I want artillery prepared to fire on
crossing of Dead Man Creek on highway 59 and enemy concentrations
in woods west of the creek .
"S-2-3 conduct reserve to assembly areas in woods west of
Lone Branch . Send assault gun platoon and mortar platoon
forward at once to report to me near junction of highway 59
and PERRY ROAD. Report to me at PERRY ROAD with
the company commanders . I am going forward ."
(3) Situation-continued .-(a) As the point crossed LONE
BRANCH it met the hostile reconnaissance cars previously
reported, quickly deployed, attacked, and destroyed the cars .
The advance guard continued the advance and as the point
approached the bridge over DEAD MAN CREEK it was fired
upon by two tanks coming down the road to the west . It
immediately moved off the road to the woods on the right .
The advance party took position on hill west of PERRY
ROAD together with the assault gun, opened fire, and
destroyed the hostile tanks . The support commander moved
the infantry platoon south of the road and a tank north
with orders to cover crossings of DEAD MAN CREEK . (See
fig. 54 .)
(b) The advance guard commander arrived at junction of
highway 59 and PERRY ROAD . He learned by radio report
from the reconnaissance platoon that DEAD MAN CREEK
was favorable for crossing by tanks to a distance of 1 mile
north of the bridge . One reconnaissance squad reconnoitering
to the south reported to the infantry platoon leader on
the south of the road that suitable tank crossings were located
200 and 400 yards south of the bridge, This was reported to
the battalion commander .
82
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
34
(c) The reconnaissance platoon leader reported enemy
patrols on west bank of DEAD MAN CREEK and what was
estimated as a platoon of tanks moving into woods north of
the road. (See fig . 54 .) Just then hostile artillery fire fell
on woods northeast of the bridge knocking out one of the two
tanks at (1) . The S-2-3 and the company commanders
arrived at this time . An air observer dropped message stating
that hostile tanks, estimated as a battalion, were moving
north of road and going toward woods north of highway 59 .
Infantry in carriers was moving into woods south of roads .
(4) Actions and orders of battalion commander-continued.
"Artillery observer, bring fire on enemy tanks at (2) .
"Look at your maps . Tanks estimated as a battalion are
moving here (pointing to map) . Infantry is moving into
that woods (pointing to woods) .
"We hold this ridge to cover development of the combat
command. DEAD MAN CREEK is fordable north of that
bridge .
"Company B with assault gun and mortar attached, move
here (see map), Prepare to repel enemy attack from west
or north and to attack on my order .
"Company C. Position rear Company B . Protect, right
flank .
"Company D. Position south Company C. One platoon
edge woods cover west on north . (See map.)
"Infantry company, move south of road, cover crossings of
DEAD MAN CREEK there . 1st platoon Company A attached
to you.
"Mortar platoon less one squad cover bridge to front .
"Assault gun platoon less one gun cover bridge to front .
"I'll be with Company B .
"Move out.
"Artillery observer be prepared to switch fires to area in
front of Company B . Come with me .
"Company A keep enemy from crossing creek to your front,
If artillery fire is needed, call me . You may adjust the fire ."
83
34 `"a. . . ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FxcusE 53 .-Illustrative problem, advance guard. (Map 1.)
84
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FroUaa 54 .-Illustrative problem, advance guard action, (Map 2 .)
85
34
3 5
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
2 35 . ATTACK BY PENETRATION-a . General.-(1) Armored
units seek to attack through weak spots in an enemy position,
break through, and destroy rear installation . Attack is
made through a well-organized position only when attack on
other points is impracticable .
(2) A penetration is characterized by attack on a narrow
front, the massing of all available fires, and the maximum
coordination of all means of attack . Often infantry and
engineers will attack first to clear paths through obstacles
through which tank units may pass .
(3) The attack is made in three echelons, Against a position
strong in antitank guns, medium tanks lead .
b. First echelon of attack,-(1) Action prior to the attack.-
Prior to the attack and after receiving the plan of
attack the battalion commander-
(a) Makes a map and personal reconnaissance of the routes
to the attack position and, from an observation post, studies
the ground over which he is to attack .
(b) Causes company commanders and as many as practicable
of lower unit commanders to make a personal reconnaissance
.
(c) Contacts infantry and reconnaissance units in the zone,
obtains all information they may have concerning the terrain
and the enemy, arranges for fire support and passage of lines .
If infantry and engineers attack first, he arranges for liaison .
(d) Obtains information on artillery support for the initial
attack and for subsequent action . Makes requests for additional
fires or changes in artillery fire plan if desired,
(e) Obtains information on air bombardment support .
Requests support desired . Makes arrangements for liaison
with air observation .
(f) Plans his attack.
(g) Issues his attack order .
(2) Plan of attack.-The plan of attack includes-
(a) Formation .-Consider width of zone and distance to
final objective . Normally the width will not exceed 1500
yards . A formation with two companies leading will usually
be satisfactory. The battalion commander prescribes the
initial formation for the companies or gives each company
a frontage .
86
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 55 .-Plan of attack showing objectives .
NorE.-Numbers designate artillery check points .
87
35
35 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 56, Plan of attack . If change of direction is necessary, make
it at a well-defined terrain feature.
88
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 35
40
ARTILLERY CONCENTRATION
AIR BOMBARDMENT
Il
(FIRE SUPPORT)
ARTILLERY
CONCENTRATION
AIR BOMBARDMENT
ARTILLERY
CONCENTRATION
AIR BOMBARDMENT
ARTILLERY
CONCENTRATION
OR SMOKE
FaDuBE 57,-Coordination of fires for initial attack . Broken symbols
show one formation for advance .
89
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
(b) Objective .-Designate a series of objectives. The first
objective is usually the enemy second line position or a prominent
terrain feature in rear of his front installations . Objective
should be easily discernible terrain features .
(c) Direction of attack.-The objectives determine the direction
of attack. However, an azimuth of attack should be
given. If a change of direction becomes necessary, make it
on a prominent terrain feature .
(d) Boundaries .-Boundaries rarely are designated unless
another battalion is attacking abreast. The boundary is then
designated by the higher commander . Each company is given
a frontage . A road or other suitable feature may be designated
as a guide . A boundary may be given between companies
. However, designation of objectives will often be
sufficient . Figure 56 shows a boundary between companies .
(e) Line of departure .-This should be some line as far forward
as available cover will permit . It may be a small stream,
edge of a woods or other distinguishing line. Different lines
of departure may be designated for each company .
(f) Time of attack.This will normally be set by the higher
commander and is on time or by signal. When infantry
attacks prior to the tanks, the tank is launched by signal .
(3) Attack through infantry .-(a) If the attack is made
through infantry, special arrangements must be made for passage
of lines . The battalion commander contacts the infantry
commander in his zone and arranges for this passage . Each
company commander contacts the infantry troops in his part
of the zone and makes arrangements whereby foot troops indicate
their positions so they will not be endangered by tanks .
Guides are posted as necessary .
(b) When infantry attacks first to clear a passage through
obstacles, liaison is maintained by the battalion commander
with the infantry commander . Infantry or engineers post
guides to show tanks where to cross the obstacles .
(4) Movement to attack positions(a) Guides are posted
or routes marked to attack positions . The battalion moves
out, protected if necessary by a small covering detachment .
The covering platoon should be from the reserve company
and takes up positions to protect the attack position and
90
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 35
.'+ + + + + + ++++++ + + ++++ + + + +I
ENGINEERS AND
INFANTRY MAKE
PASSAGE FOR TANKS
AND INDICATE TO
TANKS WHERE TO
CROSS THE OBSTACLE .
TANKS MOVE INTO ATTACK POSITION
AFTER INFANTRY ATTACK STARTS .
TANK LN OFFICERS, MOUNTED IN TANKS
ARE WITH THE INFANTRY.
FIGURE 58.-Attack through infantry and engineers who have
cleared passages through obstacles .
91
35
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
support the attack. The mortar platoon and assault gun
platoon follow the covering force and go into position . The
leading companies follow and move Into attack position . The
reserve and the battalion headquarters, less the command
group, move last. The battalion commander with his S-3
moves behind the covering force . The artillery observer eithermoves
with the battalion commander or goes to the attack
position ahead of the battalion where he will be ready to
observe and adjust fires.
(b) Movement to the attack position is made at such time
that only a few minutes will be spent in that position for last
minute check and orders .
(5) Conduct of the attack .-(a) The battalion commander
observes the attack and, by personal orders or by use of his
staff, directs the companies as necessary . The battalion
commander must use the radio himself .
(b) As the attack progresses, the battalion commander or
his S-3 designates targets or missions for the assault gun
platoon or the mortar platoon . The battalion commander
personally directs the movement of the reserve to influence
the action . He calls upon the artillery observer for fires . In
case the artillery observer becomes a casualty the battalion
commander or his officers adjust artillery fire . (See FM
17-62 .)
(c) The reserve follows the assault companies at 300 to
1,000 yards . It moves by bounds from cover to cover where
it can give continuous fire support to the leading companies
and protect the flanks . Do not use the reserve company for
artillery support when artillery is available, This will deplete
the ammunition supply and the reserve will not be able to
influence the action later . When an objective is taken the
reserve must be prepared to protect against counterattack .
(d) For action of rallying point see paragraph 33 .
92
AkMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 35
Flouts 59.Use reserve as necessary for fire support . Mortars and
assault guns displace so as to maintain continuous Sre support .
480800 42---7 93
35,
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL ,
FIGURE 60-Keep companies in . right direction . Here Company E
Is advancing in wrong direction .
94
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 81 .-Use artillery to support attack where practicable . Here
Companies D and E are held up by antitank fire. Artillery is
available and can bring down much more effective fire than can
Company F.
95
35
35
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGIIBE 62-Reserve is placed to cover flanks of leading companies on
objective .
96
ARMORED BATTALION . LIGHT AND MEDIUM
35
97
35 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
98
ARMORED BATTALION . LIGHT AND MEDIUM
FIGURE 65 .-Use reserve to make passage of lines and to assume
mission of a depleted company .
c. Second echelon of attack .-(1) Position,-The second
echelon may be either light or medium tanks . It follows the
leading echelon at a variable distance from 500 to 3,000 yards,
depending upon the terrain and the enemy situation . It
should be close enough so that the enemy will not have time
to reorganize his antitank defense after the first echelon
passes but should not be so close as to become intermingled
with elements of the first echelon .
(2) Function .-The second echelon of attack must be prepared
to-
(a) Support the leading echelon by fire .
(b) Protect the flanks of the leading echelon .
(c) Pass through and assume the mission of the first
echelon should that battalion become so depleted as to be
unable to continue on its mission .
(d) Make an envelopment to either flank .
(3) Formation.The second echelon must assume a formation
that permits fire support of the leading echelon by
99
35
35
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
some of its elements ; covers the zone of attack to beat down
hostile automatic weapons ; and facilitates movement to
either flank or passage through the first echelon . Wedge
formation will be proper in most cases .
(4) Action prior to the attack.-Prior to the attack and
after receiving the orders or plan of the regimental or combat
command commander, the battalion commander-
(a) Makes personal reconnaissance and causes lower unit
commanders to reconnoiter routes to the attack position and
to the line of departure of the first echelon .
(b) Studies map of zone of attack .
(c) Contacts battalion commander of first echelon, learns
his plan of attack, marks objectives on map, locates artillery
check points, arranges to support first echelon by fire .
(d) Contacts infantry or reconnaissance units in the front,
obtains all possible information of the enemy, arranges for
be made through mine fields or other obstacles, and arranges
for indicating to tanks the location of these paths,
ments for indicating to tanks the location of these paths .
(e) Obtains information on artillery support .
(f) Plans his attack .
(5) Plan.-The plan includes the steps outlined in b(2)
above .
(6) Conduct of the attack .-(a) The battalion moves into
position immediately after the first echelon of attack . The
battalion commander must be well forward, usually just behind
the company supporting the first echelon . He moves the
battalion forward when the first echelon has passed the first
obstacles or when his support company can no longer support
the leading echelon by fire .
(b) The battalion commander moves his battalion rapidly
forward and overruns and destroys hostile infantry and
weapons. He must be ready at all times to repel a counterattack
from either flank. He overcomes small isolated enemy
resistance by use of tanks, mortars, and artillery fire . During
the advance, the artillery may displace forward with or
behind his battalion . This artillery is not attached to his
battalion but he gives such aid and security as is consistent
with accomplishment of his mission .
(c) In case of enemy counterattack the battalion commander
immediately takes appropriate countermeasures,
100
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 35
FIGURE 66 .--Second echelon of attack. Attack positions.
101
35 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
102
as q
0Wp
aam
000c-0aa~o E .!2
P 0 43
wy d
IV M
73,0
0 0E
i 0 0
0
mb
Qw
Co8
0
a 0 N NN0
~0 . a4
abv
U 0
C 41 M ;'UW
ao~
10 4!
U
oti
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
35-36
d, Third echelon of attack .-(1) If armored infantry makes
the initial attack, the tank battalion will advance behind the
second echelon of attack, joining the infantry in front of the
line of departure . If the armored infantry does not make
the initial attack, it advances, in carriers, close behind the
second echelon of attack. The tank battalion follows the
Infantry closely . (See (3) below.)
(2) Prior to the attack the battalion commander-
(a) Makes a map and personal reconnaissance and requires
subordinate leader to make such reconnaissance as is practicable
.
(b) Contacts the infantry commander and makes arrangements
for coordination, and liaison .
(c) Plans his action .
(3) The advance to attack maybe made with infantry leading,
with tanks leading, or by tanks and infantry together .
(a) When resistance is light, infantry in carriers will
usually lead the attack. The leading tanks follow the infantry
at 200 to 500 yards . When infantry is forced off carriers by
hostile fire, tanks immediately attack and assist the infantry
to advance .
(b)' When the second echelon has not reduced all hostile
automatic weapons the tanks of the third echelon lead the
attack. Infantry follows closely in carriers if practicable .
(c) When attacking, dismounted infantry advances with or
closely behind the tanks .
(4) The tanks of the third echelon must be prepared to-
(a) Overcome local resistance holding up the infantry .
(b) Repel a counterattack .
(c) Move rapidly to either flank as an enveloping force to
assist the first or second echelon .
(d) Pursue .
∎ 36 . ENVELOPMENT .-The battalion may be used as an enveloping
force and may itself use enveloping action in attack .
a. Battalion as an enveloping force .-As an enveloping
force the battalion will usually be reinforced. It moves
rapidly around the enemy flanks and attacks from flank or
rear. The attack is timed with a frontal attack by infantry
or other tanks and with artillery fire . The objective and time
of attack is set by the higher commander, Time of attack
103
36
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
may be upon signal that the enveloping battalion is in position
. When practicable the battalion commander will be
permitted to choose his own direction of attack, the flank only
being indicated .
(1) In an envelopment, place mortars, assault guns, and a
medium tank company to support the attack by fire . Use the
remainder of the battalion as a maneuvering force .
(2) In advancing to attack positions, use a covering force
consisting of the reconnaissance platoon, one or more platoons
of tanks, and infantry .
(3) Use the reconnaissance platoon to reconnoiter the
exposed flank and protect this exposed flank by a tank platoon
. The infantry company follows the attack at about 500
yards, in carriers as far as possible, and mops up the enemy
position .
F___
FIGURE 68 .-Movement to attack positions in envelopment,
104
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 36
FIGVRE 69 .-Plan of attack, envelopment .
b . Battalion acting alone .-When acting alone the battalion
may use a single or double envelopment maneuver . Infantry,
if present, with a medium tank company and the assault gun
and mortar platoons, less detachments, forms the base of fire .
The remainder of the battalion envelops one or both flanks .
Use reconnaissance platoon for reconnaissance on both flanks .
Coordinate artillery fire with the attack .
105
36
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
r.
FxouaE 70-Single envelopment reinforced tank battalion
acting alone .
FIcvaE 71 .-Double envelopment, reinforced battalion .
106
ARMORED BATTALION, . LIGHT AND . MEDIUM
37
∎ 37. TANK VERSUS TANx ACTION (see FM 17-10) .-Attacking
tanks frequently encounter hostile tank units unexpectedly .
At other times they may be required to attack hostile tanks
deliberately in order to break up an attack or a counterattack .
It is therefore necessary that all personnel be carefully trained
in recognition of hostile and friendly tanks ; characteristics
and capabilities of hostile tanks as to armor, armament, and
speed ; vulnerable parts of hostile tanks upon which fire will
be effective ; range at which each of our weapons is effective
against hostile vehicles ; enemy methods of tank employment ;
and methods of combating hostile tanks, such as the use of
speed, defilade and cover, and ambush . In tank versus tank
actiona.
Use artillery concentrations on hostile tanks . Concentrations
will be especially effective in defiles.
b. Place some tanks (preferably medium tanks) together
with assault guns in def laded or concealed positions to fire
upon and slow down the hostile attack when enemy tanks
come within effective range.
c. Use mortars to place smoke on the enemy to disorganize
his attack. Smoke may also be used to screen maneuver of
your own tanks .
d. Maneuver part of the battalion to one or both hostile
flanks where they can attack by fire at close range, preferably
from defiladed or ccncealed position.
e . If defiladed or concealed positions are not available use
smoke both of mortars and artillery to disorganize the enemy
and screen the advance to effective range .
/. When attacking, an enemy inferior in armament, advance
rapidly to positions beyond the effective range of his weapons,
take up stationary position, and fire . If enemy advances,
withdraw and keep beyond range of his guns while still keeping
him within effective range of your own guns .
g. When attacked by an enemy whose armament is superior
to your own, withdraw and lead him into your own antitank
defenses . If there are no antitank defenses backing you
up, place smoke on enemy and maneuver rapidly to approach
within effective range .
h. Use terrain to aid in maneuver, defilade, and concealment.
107
3 7 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
ONE OR",x
tiCOMPANIES
MAY FOLLOW,*THI$,'=.ROUT
FIGURE 72 .-Tank versus tank action . Place some tanks In defllade
to flre on and slow down the enemy while other tanks maneuver
against one or both flanks . Use artillery and mortars to smoke
hostile tanks .
108
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
480600°-42--8
109
37
2500 YDS 1100-
1600 YDS
00
EFFECTIVE RANGE
HOSTILE WEAPONS
1000 YDS
0
W Z
a
W 5-
0 is
N=~~WZ
In-a wWr
ww Y3Wm
EFFECTIVE RANGE
YOUR WEAPONS y
O O
0 0 0 0
O O 1600 YDS
0 00
00 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
BYDURE 73,--If enemy armament is Inferior, advance to effective
range of your own weapons and fire . Stay out of effective range
of enemy weapons .
37 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
0 O
y
00
N
t 11-
Ia
Ita
1a
EFFECTIVE RANGE
ENEMY WEAPONS
1500 YDS .
EFFECTIVE RANGE
OWN WEAPONS
1000 YDS
la
a
FIGURE 74:In open country offering no concealment, if your weapons
are inferior to those of the enemy, withdraw and lead enemy
into fire of friendly supporting antitank guns .
110
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM 37
FIGIIRE 75 .-If not possible to withdraw to antitank supporting
weapons, use smoke screen to cover movement to effective range .
111
38-39
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
∎ 38. 13ATTALION IN RESERVE,-a . A battalion in division reserve
must be prepared to'move rapidly to a flank to extend
an envelopment, relieve a depleted assault battalion, repel a
mechanized attack, or pursue a defeated enemy, . The reserve
is located in a position where It can best support the main
attack and cover the flanks .
b. The battalion commander of the reserve battalion-
(1) Keeps himself constantly informed of the situation and
of the division commander's plans either by personal contact
with the division commander and his staff or by a liaison
officer .
(2) Maintains a liaison officer at the division command
post,
(3) Constantly studies the map and plans movements .
(4) Initiates route reconnaissance for movement of the
battalion .
(5) Keeps his battalion informed of the situation.
∎ 39. PURSUIT.-When it is recognized that the enemy is withdrawing,
pursuit must be launched immediately and, pushed
to the limit of endurance of the command even into the night .
Only lack of fuel or ammunition will be allowed to halt the
action even temporarily. The enemy must be given no rest
and must not be given time to regroup his forces and reorganize
his defense .
a. Armored battalion .-The armored battalion will usually
be part of the combat command in pursuit . It will usually be
reinforced with engineers, Infantry, and artillery .
b. Light tank battalion .-Light tank battalions together
with infantry and engineers will be given missions of advancing
rapidly behind the enemy, moving parallel to the enemy
withdrawing columns, and seizing critical terrain that will
block hostile retreat . Medium battalions then attack and
destroy the enemy,
c. Formations .-(1) When advancing along roads parallel
to the enemy, march formations are taken with reconnaissance
units to the front and flanks . When the enemy Is met,
deployment must be rapid in order to destroy the enemy force
at the earliest practicable moment.
(2) When advancing through scattered groups of enemy, a
partially deployed formation is taken, Part of the advance
112
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
39-41
may be made across country in order to pass and cut off the
retreating enemy.
d. Observation aviation.-Maximum use must be made of
observation aviation . Air observers should report direct to
the battalion headquarters by radio or drop message, giving
the enemy situation and especially locations of large bodies of
troops.
SECTION VII
DEFENSIVE ACTION
N 40. OENERAL .-C. In defense the armored battalion is held
in reserve to be used on counterattack missions to the front,
flanks, or rear . As the tank is primarily an offensive weapon
it should not be placed in position and used as a pill box,
except when the enemy is to be ambushed. This last mission
is more suited to the tank destroyer units and tanks should
not be used for that purpose when tank destroyers are present .
b. The battalion acting alone will rarely take up the defensive
unless forced to do so by lack of fuel .
1 41 . DEFENSE or A POSITION,--a . In defense of a position, infantry
occupies the main line of resistance while tank units
are held in reserve . (See FM 17-10, 17-100, and 100-5 .) The
battalion may be part of a combat command as general reserve
or may be in local reserve for a particular section of the
line. Medium tanks are normally used in local reserve while
some medium tanks and light tanks are placed in general
reserve.
b. As a local reserve the tank battalion may be called upon
to counterattack the enemy either in the front or to the flanks
before he has reached the main defenses, or counterattack an
enemy who has succeeded in penetrating the position and
destroy or eject him .
e. The reserve position should-
(1) Afford proper concealment for all vehicles and personnel
.
(2) Be large enough to allow for dispersion of vehicles,
that is, at least 50 yards between vehicles .
(3) Have good routes leading into and out of the position
so that movement may quickly be made to previously selected
attack positions .
113
41 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
FIGURE 76 .-One type of defense for armored division, showing
armored battalions as local reserves .
114
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
41
(4) Be out of effective artillery range, that is, 4,000 to
7,000 yards behind the front line,
d, ' he battalion commander must make plans for all
possible uses of the reserve including use in sectors other
than the particular sector in which his battalion is operating .
During organization of the defense, the battalion commander
moves or causes his battalion to move into a reserve position
as indicated by the higher commander, provides for local
security as in an assembly area, then proceeds as follows :
(1) 'Contacts the infantry commander in the sector, and
FIGURE 77 .-Counterattack . If possible strike the enemy before he
reaches our own lines . If front is covered with mines, passages
must be opened for this purpose or gaps left,
learns this offIcer's plans and tactical dispositions . He reconnoiters
the area and with the infantry commander plans
counterattacks and coordination for counterattacks to
include--
(a) Tank attack positions .
(b) Infantry, artillery, antitank gun, and air support of
the tank attack. (All possible weapons should support.)
115
41
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
(c) Direction for each contemplated attack.
(d) Objectives .
(e) Arrangements for marking- paths in mine fields so
tanks may attack the enemy in his attack positions or pursue
him.
(f) Arrangements for liaison . The tank battalion should
keep one liaison officer at the infantry battalion command
post . This officer must be equipped with radio, The B-3 for
FIOUEE 78 .-Counterattack . If enemy succeeds in penetrating the
position, counterattack and eject him . Do not be satisfied with
merely ejecting him, also destroy the reserves following.
air in the battalion commander's half-track vehicle may be
used for this duty.
(2) The battalion commander then outlines his plans to
his company commanders and directs them to make and have
their lower unit leaders make careful route reconnaissance
to the various attack positions . He should also require subordinate
commanders to make careful employment reconnaissance,
on foot, over the area of contemplated attack. Recon-
116
ARMORED BATTALION, LICHT AND MEDIUM
FrevaE 'i9 .-Plans of action . Each plan is numbered . All plans
must provide artillery and infantry support .
117
41
41-42
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
naissance should be made beyond the main line of resistance
to the outpost line of resistance when time is available .
(3) Next, the battalion commander visits adjacent tank
battalions and makes plans for mutual support . He obtains
reconnaissance data from these commanders and makes any
personal reconnaissance that can be made in the time
available .
(4) Orders for various plans of attack are then given .
They should be in overlay form or marked on maps . Each
FIGURE 80-Plan of action . Make plans for assistance of adjacent
battalions .
plan is given a number and when time comes for action the
battalion commander merely calls for execution of a particular
numbered plan .
X 42 . WITHDRAWAL.-a. As Part of a general covering force,
tanks will be very useful in daylight withdrawal but are of
little value at night except in bright moonlight . As part of
the covering force the tank battalion, by rapid thrusts on a
broad front, attacks and disorganizes the enemy and thus
118
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
42-43
gives other troops the opportunity to disengage and retire .
These are limited objective attacks . These attacks are supported
by available artillery. Having reached its objective the
battalion withdraws, taking with it, by towing if necessary, all
disabled tanks . The rallying point is usually the attack
position .
b. When acting alone the tank battalion uses smoke to
screen the withdrawal . A company supported by mortars and
assault guns may be used to attack as in a above, to cover
the withdrawal of the remainder of the battalion. A rear
guard is then formed .
c. Prior to withdrawal of the combat elements, trains,
except those that are absolutely essential, such as the
maintenance and medical vehicles, are sent to the rear .
43 . DELAYING ACTION,-a . As part of a larger force in delaying
action the tank battalion is used as a reserve to protect
the flanks and make limited objective attacks (par. 42) .
FIGURE 81 .-Armored battalion as part of a delaying force . Battalion
is used in reserve and attacks flank of enemy .
119
43 ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
--1
IST DELAYING
POSITION
Ftovae 82 .-Reinforced battalion In delaying action, acting alone .
120
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
THIS COMPANY
COUNTERATTACKS
AND WITHDRAWS
THIS CO PANY PROTECT$
WITHDRAWAL OF LEADING
COMPANIES
COMPANY OCCUPIES
POSITION, FIRES
FROM DEFILADE OR
IF MEDIUM COMPANY
USES INDERECT FIRE,
WITHDRAWS TO
ANOTHER DELAYING
POSITION WHEN
FORCED BACK .
MORTARS FALL BACK
TO SECOND POSITION
I
I
43
Frau8E 83 .-Armored battalion acting alone in delaying action, No
reinforcements.
121
43-45
ARMORED FORCE FIELD MANUAL
b . When acting alone in delaying action the armored battalion
will usually be reinforced with infantry, artillery, and
engineers . Artillery by long-range fire delays and forces deployment
of the enemy . Engineers destroy bridges and blow
up fords . The infantry occupies positions from which it can
force enemy deployment while tanks make limited obJective
attacks on the flanks and front of the enemy . The infantry
then withdraws under protection of the tanks to the next
delaying position .
c . If the tank battalion is not reinforced, companies or platoons
with assault guns and mortars occupy defiladed or concealed
positions to bring fire on and force the enemy to deploy
while other tanks make flank attacks . These tanks then
withdraw to the next delaying position .
d. Delay may be in one position or successive positions .
If delay is in one position, select as strong a position as practicable,
that is, high ground with a stream In front and
flanks protected by impassable ground . If delay is in successive
positions, select these positions so that enemy artillery
will have to displace. Select intermediate positions to cover ,
withdrawal and withdraw by echelon .
SECTION VIII
SPECIAL OPERATIONS
• 44 . GENERAL .-Although fundamentals are the same for
special operations as for other tank actions, certain operations
present special problems that require some change in
technique . The paragraphs below are written as a guide for
solving certain type operations . Some conditions, such as
operations in desert or in snow and ice, require special training
and seasoning of troops.
• 45 . ATTACK OF A RIVER LINE-In the attack of a river line
the armored battalion is normally part of a larger force .
However, the battalion when acting alone may seize bridges
over unfordable streams, may force the crossing of streams
at fords, or may with the assistance of engineers, cross small
unfordable streams, The latter will be exceptional and the
122
ARMORED BATTALION, LIGHT AND MEDIUM
45
battalion must be reinforced with reconnaissance, infantry,
engineer, and artillery elements for such operations .
a . As part of a larger force (see FM 17-10) .-The infantry
supported by artillery and fire of medium tanks forces the
crossing, the engineers build the bridge, and the tanks then
cross . Some tanks may be ferried across early. Light and
medium tanks may be used to support the crossing by fire .
Medium tanks are more suitable for this purpose .
(1) Light armored battalion.Light tanks are held in concealed
assembly areas beyond range of hostile medium artillery
fire and move to the river at the proper time to be ferried
across or to use the bridge. An assembly point is designated
on the far bank of the river where the battalion is reformed .
Subsequently, the battalion performs such missions as are
directed . Do not close up on river bank, or move up too early .
The enemy may launch an air attack or bring artillery fire
on the column .
(2) Medium armored battalion .-The medium armored
battalion, when not 'used for fire support, is -conducted the
same as the light armored battalion in (1) above. A medium
armored battalion may be used to assist the initial crossing
by direct or indirect laying methods . When so used these
tanks are placed in concealed positions close to the river
bank, preferably on high ground. Medium tanks should not
be used to replace artillery but are used for fire on definitely
located enemy targets . Do not fire all your ammunition ;
it will be needed when the crossing is effected .
123