GENERAL
1. During the winter 1952-53 two reinforced company groups of the Mobile
Striking Force (MSF) were rotated through Fort Churchill for a four week period of
intensive Arctic training under the direction of the Commandant, Fort Churchill.
The area where the training was conducted was north of the treeline although there
were scattered scrub forests. No vehicles were used in a tactical role, and all tactical
movement was carried out on foot. On D Day everything in the exercise area was
parachuted to the ground from a Dakota aircraft, with the exception of the
participating troops. A detachment of photographic reconnaissance aircraft plus a
photo interpretation team supplied the photo map and photo cover in lieu of maps.
2. The training schedule for each company was as follows:
(a) Administration and staging - 9 days
(b) Indoctrination training - 6 days
(c) Field training - 8 days
(d) Exercise - 7 days
3. (a) Dates: PRAIRIE TUNDRA I - 12 Nov - 12 Dec 52
 PRAIRIE TUNDRA II - 14 Jan - 15 Feb 53
(b) Area: FORT CHURCHILL
(c) Troops Participating:
(i) PRAIRIE TUNDRA I
Friendly Force (Army)
Coy 2 R22eR 123
MMG Section 2 R22eR
3” Mortar Section 2 R22eR
4.2” Mortar Section 1 Lt Bty (Para) 66
159
Detachment 57 Fd Sqn RCF 1
Detachment AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn 9
Detachment Airborne P1 RCASC 5
Detachment No 1 Airborne Med Sec RCAMC 5
TOTAL 209
Friendly Force (RCAF)
Air Coordinator 5
Lancaster 6
Dakota 5
JAPIS 8
Ground crew etc 18
TOTAL 42
FORT CHURCHILL
Participation from Army and RCAF
Enemy Force
P1 2 R22eR 40
Detachment 57 Fd Sqn RCE 2
TOTAL 42
(ii) PRAIRIE TUNDRA II
Friendly Force (Army)
Coy RCR 123
MMG Section RCR
3” Mortar Section RCR
4.2” Mortar Section 1 Lt Bty (Para) 66
Detachment 57 Fd Sqn RCE 1
Detachment AF Bde Gp Sigs Sqn 9
Detachment Airborne P1 RCASC 5
Detachment No 1 Airborne Med Sec RCAMC 5
TOTAL 209
160
Friendly Force (RCAF)
Air Cordinator 5
Lancaster 6
Dakota 5
JAPIS 8
Ground crew etc 18
TOTAL 42
FORT CHURCHILL
Participation from Army and RCAF
Enemy Force
P1 RCR 40
Detachment 57 Fd Sqn RCE 2
TOTAL 42
AIM
4. The aim of the training programme was to:
(a) Train elements of the Mobile Striking Force in their role of reducing
enemy lodgements in Northern CANADA over diversified terrain during
winter.
(b) Emphasize all aspects of Arctic training within the limits of the current
Mobile Striking Force Standard Operating Procedure and experiment to
improve this procedure.
LESSONS LEARNED - OPERATIONAL
Planning and Preparation
5. Prior to participation in Northern exercises, troops should be familiarized with
the contents of the following:
(a) Arctic Manuals CATP 9 (1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Lessons Learned on previous Northern exercises.
161
6. All Officers of MSF Battalions must have read the current Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) on Mobile Striking Force operations.
7. More liaison is required between the battalion participating on exercises and the
staff at Fort Churchill, particularly regarding the background of the troops to take
part. Commanding Officers should visit Fort Churchill at least two months prior to
the arrival of their troops to plan the indoctrination and exercise phases of the
training. A team from Fort Churchill should visit the units at their Unit Home
Stations to give detailed instructions on what will be expected of them during the
training in the Fort Churchill area.
Command and Control
8. When errors are committed, troops must be stopped and constructively criticized
and made to repeat that particular phase of the operation. This applies to both the
elementary training carried out during the indoctrination and the tactical training
carried out during the latter part of the exercise training.
Offensive Support
9. Without offensive air support a company group loses a tremendous advantage.
Aircraft were not available for this purpose on these exercises. There is some doubt
that without offensive support two company groups could overwhelm a well
entrenched enemy platoon.
Transport Support
10. When supplies are being dropped, troops have a great tendency to run out onto
the Dropping Zone (DZ) too early and are apt to be injured by falling packages.
This especially applies when stores or rations are being free dropped.
Fire Support
11. For security of the gun area, whenever possible gunners must take advantage of
the infantry positions. However the gunners must retain one Bren gun per tent to be
used for local protection.
12. Fifty-three all ranks are required for Northern operations to efficiently operate a
4-gun troop of 4.2” mortars.
162
13. All mortars with their associated equipment and ammunition can be para
dropped into the gun positions. Accuracy within 100 yards could be attained with
practice.
14. The ten man tent is required as a Command Post.
15. The gun position officer should parachute early in the operation to confirm recce
and lay out his gun area.
16. By actual trial it takes from 60 to 90 minutes to prepare each mortar position.
17. It was found that special cushioning of branches or packed snow is required to
protect the baseplate of the 3” mortar.
18. Of the 8 MMGs dropped, two were damaged when the packing was knocked off
the cross head and the elevating screw. The two which were damaged were ejected
from the door which caused too much oscillation during the parachute descent,
rather than being dropped from pararacks. Those dropped from pararacks suffered
no damage.
19. 3” and 4.2” mortars were dropped 16 times into fire positions and no damage
was reported. Ammunition/bombs must be dropped in the same pass as the
mortar/MMG.
Engineer Support
20. As a result of this exercise it appears that the extraction of igniters and detonators
from mines and booby traps when used under conditions of extreme cold is
impossible. They should be destroyed in situ.
Reconnaissance - Photo
21. Photo reading requires increased attention. In many areas where MSF operations
may take place no maps are available. All officers and NCOs must be completely
confident of their photo reading. To this end a special two-week course will be
conducted at the Canadian School of Military Intelligence for MSF personnel.
22. The Land Camera was a great success. When first used its prints were not clear
and if dropped too soon (while they were still wet) they freeze in the container. A
coating of special wax may make the prints more permanent. The value of these
photos is impressive. Within five minutes of a request from the company
commander the photos were taken, developed and air dropped.
163
Movement
23. The tendency to string out in single file when moving on the barrens must be
condemned. As a formation it offers minimum protection.
Assault Tactics
24. Except for communications there appears to be no firm reason for insisting upon
a permanent DZ. The labour in going back for supplies is excessive. The Surgical
Team, supporting weapons and spare equipment can be dropped where and as
required. If properly planned and coordinated, only the OP Party need be dropped
on the initial drop. This party can recce the gun area, the main body to follow on
subsequent airlifts.
Patrols
25. The importance of patrols is so great and the requirement of coordination so
exacting that a patrol master is recommended, possibly the battalion sniper sergeant.
26. Patrolling is a most important skill and takes a good portion of the time required
for an operation. All automatic weapons will have to be pinpointed, all minefields
and trip flares found, all sentries and scouts located, all shelters and HQs known, and
if possible, all enemy “alert” procedures studied before an attack is launched. Patrols
should not only recce in detail the Assembly Area, FUP and SL, they must also mark
them in some foolproof manner, probably by tape, and record the distance and
direction for confirmation later by dead reckoning.
Defence
27. The defence of the company group area is an unsolved problem. If the windchill
is high a sentry can only remain alert for approximately 15 minutes. With such a
turnover everyone in the company group is up at least once each night, and with
restricted fuel, cannot get warm until breakfast. In these two exercises there was an
average of 16½ hours of darkness. If a half-hour exposure is the maximum a sentry
can stand without relief, a roster is essential. If a tent group goes on duty it can
operate in three ways. The first is, by all five at once. This is the coldest system. The
second is, by four men at once, leaving one man to light a stove to warm the other
four men on their return. This reduces the number of sentries. The third method is
by operating in pairs with one-half hour on sentry duty followed by one-half hour in
the tent. This is most fatiguing. A defence platoon was considered but rejected. The
possible use of dogs was considered. Quiet sentry dogs may be an answer. Trip flares
may also supply an answer but they freeze and cannot be easily moved. The company 
164
groups tried to minimize the danger of enemy mortar fire by adopting platoon boxes
but these could not be defended or patrolled. The best solution appears to be:
(a) Select a site to take maximum advantage of the ground.
(b) Move by night and rest by day.
Camouflage, Concealment and Deception
28. Snow walls should not entail too much work despite the added comfort. They
should be built about three feet high, on the North West side of tents (in the Fort
Churchill Area). They should slope to lift the wind. If more time than necessary is
spent on the construction of snow walls it detracts from the time required for the
construction of tactical defences.
Communications
29. The WS 88 has insufficient range for operation from the OP to the mortar
positions and should be replaced by the WS 31.
30. One of the Battalion Signal Officers should attend each exercise of a company
group or larger.
31. Constant and strict supervision is required of all operators if reliable
communications are to be expected.
32. The WS 62 operated by five RC Sigs personnel was a suitable link from the
company HQs back to the DZ. There were problems of weight, fuses, batteries, and
the operation of the chorehorse generator, but the set operated well, even after being
hauled 12 miles in one day over very rough terrain. A lightweight high powered set is
required.
33. Assault cable should be laid between the Patrol Base and the DZ, and between
the gun position and the Forward Observation Officer. The best type of cable
appears to be twisted assault cable supplied on dispenser coils. The weight is 22
pounds per thousand yards.
34. When the Force Commander wishes to speak to an aircraft using voice procedure
he should be on the set himself. Special care must be taken to use only words,
phrases and procedures known to both Services.
165
35. Messages were not encoded during these exercises. Since it would be possible for
an enemy to carry an appropriate set and monitor our transmissions regarding
location of DZs, assembly areas, patrols and avenues of approach, an “Arctic” slidex
card is considered necessary.
Medical
36. Stretcher bearers are required on the scale of two per Infantry Platoon. They
should be trained at the Medical Corps School on a special course conducted for
MSF stretcher bearers. Each stretcher bearer should be equipped with one new type
casualty bag, carried on a two-man toboggan.
37. The RAP should be composed of:
(a) Medical Officer and four RCAMC personnel.
(b) Two five-man tents (holding and examination).
38. The Treatment Centre carried in a subsequent airlift should be composed of:
(a) Surgeon plus four medical assistants.
(b) Three ten-man tents.
39. The method of operating found best was:
(a) RAP parachuted and remained with the company group.
(b) RAP eventually set up in Patrol Base.
(c) A Surgical Team parachuted with equipment when called for, probably
in Patrol Base, or possibly on captured objective.
40. The gasoline stoves used for heating and cooking purposes on these exercises
caused considerable irritation to the eyes. Symptoms of the irritation were redness of
the eyes, watering, puffiness, gritting in the eyeball, fuzziness of vision, sensitivity to
light, especially glare, accompanied by headache and bad temper. It was common
twenty to twenty-four hours after the campsite was established and was more
prevalent during blustery weather and low temperatures. Application of ointment
gave quick relief but did not improve vision. A total of 97 out of the Company
Group complained officially. The fumes did not appear to affect the lungs but the
malady was exaggerated by an undue amount of cigarette smoking.
166
Training
41. A training cadre from the troops participating should precede the main body to
Fort Churchill. This cadre should be given a two-week indoctrination course under
the direction of the Commandant, Fort Churchill. After receiving this indoctrination
training they could be employed as instructors to indoctrinate the main body. A
cadre for the indoctrination of a Company Group should include Company
Commander, CQMS, three Officers and three Senior NCOs. Personnel selected for
this cadre should have had previous Northern experience.
42. Navigation by dead reckoning must be mastered at the Unit Home Stations.
This skill requires detailed preparation beyond ordinary compass reading. Full details
are included in the hand book “Navigation by Dead Reckoning” TB FNG 90.
43. All weapons must be inspected daily. Strict discipline will be required to ensure
weapons are not carried strapped to toboggans.
Administration
44. When rations are free dropped from a Dakota, the aircraft must fly at less than
110 knots and below 200 feet to prevent damage to the ration packs