Kasserine Pass and the Proper Application of Airpower

There were many reasons for the American debacle at Kasserine Pass in February 1943, but perhaps the most significant in terms of lessons for the future was poor handling—largely as a result of inferior doctrine—of the combat air assets available to the Allies prior to the battle. Most of the traditional principles of war were ignored. The treatment in FM 31-35 of airpower as flying artillery to be parceled out in support of ground formations at the point of attack squandered aircraft on costly and frequently inconsequential missions, ensured that other aircraft were underutilized in the midst of disagreements over priorities, and left many more lucrative targets untouched. The emphasis on defensive air umbrellas meant that superior German fighters could concentrate at important points and return to the sanctuary of their airfields. The enemy was able to take the initiative both in the air and on the ground until stopped by the weight of numbers, but many Allied casualties were incurred. In July 1943, in response to the problems with FM 31-35, the Army introduced FM 100-20. The new manual asserted: “Land power and air power are co-equal and interdependent forces. . . . Control of available air power must be centralized and command must be exercised through the air force commander if this inherent flexibility and ability to deliver a decisive blow are to be fully exploited.”10 This doctrine would be proven in Western Europe in 1944–45. The tenets of FM 100-20 remain integral to current Air Force doctrine. AFDD 1, Air Force Basic Doctrine, makes “centralized control and decentralized execution” a fundamental of airpower: Air and space power must be controlled by an airman who maintains a broad strategic and/or theater perspective in prioritizing the use of limited air and space assets to attain the objectives of all U.S. forces in any contingency across the range of operations.... The lesson is clear: attempts to fragment the control and planning of air and space power will ultimately cost blood and treasure by diverting effort and impact. Centralized control allows commanders to focus on those priorities that lead to victory. As our forces shrink because of budget reductions, the need for a single commander who can efficiently prioritize the use of precious air assets in pursuit of campaign objectives should be readily apparent.


THE BATTLE OF KASSERINE PASS: AN EXAMINATION OF ALLIED OPERATIONAL FAILINGS

The failure at Kasserine Pass proved to be a temporary tactical setback for the American and Allied forces. Despite the various operational failings on the part of the Allies, and particularly the Americans, Axis forces were unable to make any strategic gains from their victories over the period from 14-21 February. Ultimately, the Americans learned much from their failures in this campaign – lessons that would be carried over to the ensuing campaigns in Sicily, Italy, and northern France. One such lesson was the importance of an efficient logistics and supply line. By March 1943, the Allies had drastically improved the logistics flow in North Africa. To remedy the problem with a shortage of transportation, more than 4,500 2-1/2- ton trucks were delivered from the United States. The influx of trucks for transportation improved the flow of food, fuel, ammunition, and weapons to the front. Several brief diary entries from Capt Hatfield reveal how improved logistics affected the troops at the front. Writing on 8 March 1943, Hatfield says, “after lunch, I drove a new M-5 tank, with twin engines. It runs very smoothly and quietly, and is very easy to shift.”98 Again referring to the flood of new weaponry he writes, “this will help us complete refitting the 2nd Bn of the 1st AD and allow the TD crews to become familiar with their 37 new 75-mm guns.”99 In addition to greater availability of transport, roads and railways were improved and repaired to facilitate the delivery of supplies and personnel to the front in Tunisia as Allied forces pressed their offensive to the east.100 A second valuable lesson for the Americans was the importance of competent combat leadership. Throughout the Tunisian campaign, Eisenhower had been alarmed at the Americans’ inability to apply their training to the existing battle conditions and he was appalled by numerous examples of poor discipline.101 He realized the role of commanders to instill the necessary discipline among the troops and also the importance of ensuring combat forces received proper training and equipment. A commander such as Fredendall who spent his time some 65-miles away from his forces could not ensure the combat troops were battle-ready and disciplined. As previously mentioned, Fredendall did not champion the ideals of centralized control and decentralized execution, as he failed to entrust subordinate commanders with the necessary initiative and authority to act on their own. In his many diary entries, Captain Hatfield captures several instances of the distrust between Fredendall and Ward. Writing on 25 February 1943, Hatfield states, “Gen Fredendall asked for Gen Ward’s relief about 2 weeks ago, but Gen Eisenhower said no. Gen Ward is going to get out from under Fredendall and the sooner the better.”102 Despite Fredendall’s misgivings, however, “Gen Harmon, CG of 2nd AD, … came down to see Gen Ward this morning. He says Gen Ward is very solid with high command.”103 Eisenhower and AFHQ were well aware of the situation regarding Fredendall, and, although acting somewhat belatedly, worked to remedy the situation. Hatfield again provides a clear picture of these events. “There was quite a meeting of generals, including General Eisenhower, Gen Fredendall, Gen Bradley, Gen Eddie (9th Inf Div), Gen Allen (1st Inf Div), and Gen Ward. The meeting was successful for Gen Ward. He told me that he no longer has to worry about a knife in his back and is tops with high command…We now have a new Corps commander, Gen George S. Patton. Fredendall returns to the States.”104 Competent commanders were needed to lead American forces and instill an aggressive spirit in the force.105 Although not discussed above, numerous other aspects of the Tunisian campaign as well as the experiences of the Battle of Kasserine Pass were also applied by U.S. military and political leaders to improve the conduct of the war. These included the need to improve equipment such as tanks, and anti-tank weapons to counter the German Wehrmacht’s forces. With respect to the improved equipment, Hatfield wrote, “we have a battalion of TD (776th) attached to us who are equipped with the new M-10 guns (75-mm on the M-3 tank chassis). The Germans will be quite surprised.”106 Beyond the need for improved equipment, Eisenhower recommended that training be improved for forces entering the military to better prepare units for the rigors of combat as they had experienced in North Africa. Additionally, the Americans realized the need to improve upon the coordination between air and ground forces in a combined-arms warfare concept. Again, Captain Hatfield’s diaries encapsulate these changes as they were occurring. On 5 March 1943, he wrote, “we had lunch with the Air Corps and then went to Bou Chekba to a meeting of our officers. Col Howze was conducting a tactical walk and discussion on the ground east of Bou Chekba. It was very interesting and instructive.” 107 Hatfield wrote further on 7 March, “Gen Patton and Gen Bradley came down after lunch. We all went to the tactical walk on the combined arms, near Bou Chekba.”108 The coming offensive drive to the Tunisian seaboard would show greatly improved integration of ground and air forces. In due course, all these lessons and changes were incorporated and played a role in the eventual Allied victory in Europe.

