PITTSFIELD — A window upstairs at Mark Charland's Pittsfield jewelry store provides a ringside seat to watch auto racing. And on some days, a demolition derby. 

He regularly sees cars and trucks coming south on Route 8 collide with vehicles in one of Pittsfield's most troublesome intersections.

"I get a bird's-eye view of it, and it happens two to three times a year," Charland said. "It's people running red lights." 

Charland Jewelers sits near the Allendale Shopping Center, close to where routes 8 and 9 join with Dalton Avenue and Merrill Road. 

The state Department of Transportation is poised to spend $2.5 million to do something about the higher-than-normal volume of accidents in a 1.4-mile stretch known for congestion and what the DOT terms "driver frustration." 

The project might for the first time deploy "adaptive signal controls" in Berkshire County, a system that monitors traffic volume and adjusts green lights to relieve congestion. 

Working off the results of a June 2015 study, the DOT will revamp how nine sets of traffic signals operate in the area in a bid to improve safety and relieve backups. Work is scheduled to start in the spring of 2020 and take nine months to a year.

The department will outline its plans at a public hearing at 7 p.m. Thursday in the City Council chambers. People who attend can sound off on what they see as the zone's top road safety problems. 

And they did just that when The Eagle stopped by the area Friday afternoon.

One traffic light not even on the DOT's list to address — at Dalton Avenue and Meadowview Drive — contributes to many accidents, people said. 

"That light is nasty," said Maryann Carmel, pausing at the counter of Kelly's Diner at 860 Dalton Ave., another business that holds a ringside seat to snarls and accidents. 

Once the issue came up, three other diner employees came to offer opinions. All agreed, as did a crew at the neighboring Mavis Discount Tire, that the traffic signal at Meadowview Drive just to the east is a problem. 

"There's so much congestion, people are trying to beat that light," Carmel said. "It is what it is. You just have to slow down."

Stingy green lights at the intersection seem to constrain east-west traffic on Dalton Avenue, people say, creating tie-ups and adding to frustration. 

The physical layout at the junction is another problem, Carmel and others say, because it is part of a "jug handle" intersection. People traveling east on Dalton Avenue who want to turn left onto Meadowview have to go right into the lot of a nearby business, Harbor Freight Tools, then swing back around.

Another issue with the signal is that people coming west out of Dalton try to beat the light at the Meadowview intersection, perhaps perceiving that it doesn't remain green long. 

One man who works in the neighborhood said it appears to him that traffic coming out of the Harbor Freight lot gets a green light the instant the other signal goes red — not allowing enough time for the intersection to clear. 

Nearby at Mavis Discount Tire, four guys standing in front of an open bay laughed at what they've seen drivers do along Dalton Avenue. 

Colin Dezess recalled the tractor-trailer driver who disregarded the low but wide median that separates east-west travel lanes. 

"He said `screw it' and went right up and over. They should take this median right out," Dezess said. 

Chris White, one of his co-workers, said the congestion often raises temperatures. 

"People are laying on their horns," he said. 

One reason for accidents near Kelly's Diner, several people said, is that drivers coming down Route 8 from Cheshire who turn left onto Dalton Avenue fail to react in time to traffic coming in or out of hard-to-see lots at Auto Zone and the diner.

While the DOT project is promising "lane re-striping," the project will not change the basic flow of traffic. 

That's a concern for Ashuar Quaseem, who owns two businesses across Dalton Avenue, Berkshire Wireless Repair and Uniq Vape. 

"We're not changing any lanes, so that kills that," Quaseem said. "Better `laning' is very important. It's not well marked. That's a huge, huge problem."

In front of his stores, two lanes of traffic heading west soon broaden to four lanes, plus a cutoff that channels traffic north on Route 8 toward Cheshire. 

On the day The Eagle visited, cars trying to get into a Cumberland Farms gas station at 885 Dalton Ave. were clogging one travel lane. Later, a tanker truck stopped at the gas station to provide fuel added to the congestion.

"The traffic is really heavy and nobody stops," Quaseem said. Minutes before, as he pulled into the lot at his businesses, a driver behind him was tailgating, seemingly unaware he needed to slow to pull off the avenue. 

"I'm like, `Please don't hit me. It's a nice day,'" he said. 

Matt Reis, who works at the phone repair store, said he is most aware of the sheer congestion.

"You're always sitting at a red light for a bit," Reis said. 

Matt Spanos, an employee at Uniq Vape, recalls an accident this year that resulted in a car overturning. Others in the neighborhood remember that crash as well, which they say happened closer to Hubbard Avenue. 

"I've seen a few close calls. There have been bad accidents," Spanos said. "I looked outside and saw an upside-down car."

Project scope

Patrick Marvin, a DOT spokesman, said the project will update traffic signal equipment at nine intersections. One goal is to improve the visibility of the many "signal heads" that hang over the junctions. 

In just one of the nine locations, at Hubbard and Dalton avenues, nine separate vertical boxes contain traffic lights. 

The DOT hopes to improve the flow of traffic and make the roads safer, Marvin said. Fixes will also seek to improve the ability of people to cross roads on foot. 

Use of the new adaptive signal controls has been credited with reducing travel time by 10 percent nationally, according to the Federal Highway Administration. The system uses real-time data to adjust the timing of traffic lights to ease congestion. 

Traffic can be monitored different ways, including use of video, radar, or "loops" embedded in the pavement. Marvin said the types of devices to be used will be decided as DOT designs advance.

He said no video would be stored or used for any other purpose. 

Charland, the jewelry store owner, said he's seen other tweaks at the intersection in the more than seven years he's been in business. He seemed ready to accept new signals.

"As long as they're not shutting down the road," he said. 

Larry Parnass can be reached at lparnass@berkshireeagle.com, at @larryparnass on Twitter and 413-496-6214.
