It can be a major source of frustration in Edmonton: waiting for the bus and not knowing when it will arrive. That is now a thing of the past for Edmonton Transit. As Vinesh Pratap reports, all buses can now be tracked through your smartphone or a computer.

The City of Edmonton is showing off its Smart Bus technology now that all of its 928 buses are equipped with it, completing the $18-million project.

On Tuesday afternoon, ETS branch manager Eddie Robar demonstrated how Smart Bus technology works.

One of the primary features is that riders can track their bus in real time on every route in the city before waiting at any one of the 7,300 bus stops in Edmonton. It also provides riders with automated stop announcements, automated vehicle monitoring, and GPS location services.

“A full bus fleet with Smart Bus technology is an incredible accomplishment for ETS,” Robar said.

“It improves the reliability, predictability and accessibility of transit service. The collection of data also assists transit planners when designing how service is delivered to citizens.”

Wi-Fi now available at all LRT stations on Edmonton’s Capital Line

The city said ETS surveys have found an internationally used third-party app called Transit is popular with riders. The smartphone app has real-time schedules, departure alarms and system maps.

The smart bus technology was launched in Edmonton in January 2011 after city council approved $3.4 million to start the project. During the first phase, 45 buses were equipped with the technology. During the next several years, the city purchased new buses that were equipped with smart bus features.

Edmonton Transit going more high-tech

In 2014, ETS started to retrofit its existing fleet of buses with funding approved by council. At the end of 2014, city council approved additional funding to add the technology to another 500 buses.

In December 2015, council approved funding to install smart bus technology to the remaining 125 buses.