Sidewalk Toronto is not just going to be a fancy high-tech community that will sit on the waterfront of Canada’s largest city. The newly announced, Alphabet Inc-backed project will be similar to a smartphone’s operating system, according to the company.

“What made (the smartphone) ultimately magical is that it enabled millions of people around the world to use their imagination and skills to create apps that, in most cases, no one ever dreamed the platform would be used for and keep it fresh, changing, useful and current,” said Dan Doctoroff, chief executive of Sidewalk Labs, Google’s sibling, in an interview.

“The notion of the city as a platform — combing physical infrastructure, digital infrastructure, governance and then enabling people to create on top of it — is a completely different approach to city building.”

On Tuesday, Sidewalk Labs said it will be investing $50 million into Toronto’s waterfront to create a mixed-use community that uses new digital technology and unique urban design to solve city problems such as sustainability, affordability, mobility and economic opportunity.

The announcement was made alongside Waterfront Toronto — which issued a request for proposal for the 12 acres of land in March — as well as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Ontario Premier Kathleen Wynne and Toronto Mayor John Tory. The three levels of government have committed $1.25 billion in funding for waterfront revitalization.


The project is called Sidewalk Toronto, and it will start with a 12-acre neighbourhood called Quayside before expanding to roughly 800 acres in the years to follow if all goes to plan, the company said.

“Sidewalk was founded on the belief that there is a combination of technologies that are uniquely becoming available at this time, this moment right now, that are capable of addressing some of those big urban challenges,” Doctoroff said.


You could be in a position to actually start construction 18 months to two years from now... with the goal of opening up the first building in 2021 or so

   
WALT DISNEY-INSPIRED CITY OF THE FUTURE
The idea is that Quayside and the larger Sidewalk Toronto project will be a model city for the world. It will be constantly changing as it tests the latest technology and urban designs when it comes to everything from waste management and mixed-use buildings to transportation and business.

For inspiration, Sidewalk Labs looked at about 150 different projects from the last 50 years where companies or organizations tried to make a city of the future or so-called innovation districts. The one that resonated the most was Walt Disney’s original plan for EPCOT in Florida before he died in 1966 and his company eventually decided to turn into another theme park.

“His original vision, more than anyone else’s, was the one that inspired us because he really got that integration of urbanism and technology right,” Doctoroff said, adding that Disney truly understood the idea of the city being a platform that people create on top of.

“He realized that the city is never done. It’s always going to evolve and you want people to play a role in evolving it and you have to create the conditions for that evolution up front. We were more inspired by him than any attempt over the last 50 years.”


Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, left, laughs with Dan Doctoroff, chief executive officer of Sidewalk Labs LLC, during an event in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, on Tuesday, Oct. 17, 2017. Cole Burston/Bloomberg
GETTING APPROVED
Sidewalk Labs said it searched the globe for the right place to house its prototype community. The company looked at 52 cities and hundreds of potential sites in North America, as well as other areas such as western Europe and Australia.

Doctoroff said Sidewalk was looking for a city with a significant amount of land and had several key things including a culture of openness and diversity, self awareness about the issues it was facing, governmental alignment, an openness to different approaches and a combination of urban legacy melding with a tech ecosystem.

“When we looked at Toronto, it literally checked the boxes on every count,” he said.

At the same time as Sidewalk Labs was searching for options, Waterfront Toronto — an organization formed in 2001 as partnership between three levels of Canadian government to manage the lands by Lake Ontario — had been reevaluating itself and its mandate for the city.

“People were placing big bets in terms of the private sector on what was going to happen down here,” said Will Fleissig, chief executive of Waterfront Toronto, in an interview. 

“But this was mostly our land, the waterfront, so we had a chance to create this idea of a test bed. Let’s try some new things, try some new partnerships and see if this idea of bringing people in earlier rather than us coming up with a plan and asking the private sector to respond.”

Waterfront Toronto issued its RFP in March to find a partner to help solve urban issues and work together from the ground up. In the end, there were three final proposals that went into the next round, each with “very deep discussions,” Fleissig said.

After visiting sample sites or projects and bringing in a selection committee with third party experts, the recommendation was to go with Sidewalk Labs’ proposal and Waterfront Toronto’s board approved.

“Now we are developing a plan. There is no land involved at this point,” he said. “These are initial ideas that these guys have put out, but what does everyone else think? How would they like to hook into this?”

Tuesday’s seemingly daunting announcement is possible and great for the city, according to Matti Siemiatycki, an associate professor at the University of Toronto’s department of geography and planning.

“There is major development by a number of large multinational corporations already investing (in the waterfront), so I think the scale is feasible,” he said. “What’s really interesting and exciting is the new possibilities of having companies like Google and Sidewalk involved, because with that technology we aren’t just building the city of yesterday, we are really trying to understand how to build the city of tomorrow.”

The project signifies how important Toronto is on a global scale and how major international corporations are understanding what the city brings to the table, including its values and diversity, Siemiatycki said.

“Technology is a means to an end. It allows you to further the values that a place holds and Toronto is very exciting to test this because of what sits at its core.”

 


NEXT STEPS
Before breaking ground on Quayside, there will be a year of consultation with the public, private sector and others beginning with a town hall in Toronto on November 1. A plan will then be brought to the Waterfront Toronto board and Sidewalk Labs for approval.

“You could be in a position to actually start construction 18 months to two years from now… with the goal of opening up the first building in 2021 or so,” Doctoroff said.

“What we hope you’ll see over the next year is real humility on our part about what we know, what we don’t and a real willingness to listen and engage, while also bringing together the smartest minds and creative thinkers to develop something new no one has done before.”