Nearly 14 years ago, Rob McDowell bought a sky-high condominium in The 501, a hip, sleek apartment building in Vancouver’s Yaletown neighborhood. He was single and had no kids, so 500 square feet seemed quite enough, especially given the panoramic views from the windows of his 29th-story apartment. He could see the ocean. He could see islands in the distance. He could look over the other towers to the forested slopes of the North Shore Mountains. When the fog rolled in, he felt he was floating above it.

“I invited all my friends up there to see the view,” McDowell told me later. “I was so happy.”

But that changed as the months went past.

Whenever McDowell left his apartment, he would follow a hallway he shared with 20-odd people to an elevator bank he shared with nearly 300 people. When the elevator door opened, he could never be sure whom he would see inside. Standing a foot or two apart, well within the zone of personal space, McDowell and his neighbours would studiously avoid eye contact, gazing up instead at the LED floor display. McDowell felt increasingly uneasy. His view was no salve for solitude.

“You go up the elevator, into your apartment, the door closes, and there you are, stuck alone with your beautiful view,” he said. “I began to resent it.”


McDowell’s tower, so successful in delivering privacy, views of nature and a sense of status, was falling short as a social tool. In short, the building made him less happy.

McDowell’s story points to one of the greatest challenges of our urbanizing century.

We know that to deal with the pressing issues of our age — population growth, resource scarcity, and climate change — we need to find ways of living that have a lighter footprint. We need to blow less carbon into the atmosphere. We need to succeed using less energy. And we need to make better use of the land we have.

That means learning how to build and live in more dense, connected neighbourhoods and cities. How can we ensure that those sustainable places also make us happy?

Well, psychologists have been telling us for years that the most powerful contributor to human happiness and well-being is not sex, status, money or ice cream. It is the sum total of our positive relationships with other people.

People who are well connected to family, friends and community are not just cheerier then less-connected people. They are healthier. They are more productive. They are more satisfied with their lives. And they live as much as 15 years longer.

For more than half a century, we have been building cities that actually corrode our relationships
So we need to pay attention to the ways that our cities affect our social lives. The evidence from decades of research suggests that urban design influences how we feel and how we behave. Most importantly, it influences our relationships with other people.

The bad news: For more than half a century, we have been building cities that actually corrode our relationships.

Surveys show that people who live in car-dependent neighbourhoods on the edge of big, North American cities are much less likely to trust their neighbours, do favours for them, have them for dinner, volunteer, or even vote, than people who live in older, more walkable neighbourhoods. The more time that people in any given neighbourhood spend commuting, the less likely they are to play team sports, go to community events, or get involved in social groups.

Put simply, long commutes corrode our relationships by stealing our social time. A Swedish study found that people who endure more than a 45-minute commute were actually 40% more likely to divorce.

But there’s a problem at the other end the density spectrum as well. The one place where social trust is reported to be as low as the exurban fringe is in the residential tower. For decades, people in towers have complained about being both lonely and crowded at the very same time.

This is true even in Vancouver, where the city’s dense, high status, residential downtown has received accolades and admirers from around the globe. The Vancouver Foundation found that people living in towers consistently reported feeling less connected than people living on the ground. They were only half as likely to have done a recent favour for a neighbour. They had more trouble making friends.

The building was built in the style that has come to be known as Vancouverism and exported around the world: a tall, thin tower standing upon a three-story podium
While this is at least partly due to the effect of transience — people move in and out of Vancouver’s tower neighbourhoods more frequently — the evidence suggests that buildings can mediate our relationships through design.

Which brings us back to Rob McDowell, the discontented high-rise apartment dweller. McDowell’s tower, The 501, offers something of a social laboratory.

The building was built in the style that has come to be known as Vancouverism and exported around the world: a tall, thin tower standing upon a three-story podium.

In this case, the City of Vancouver forced the developer to build a row of town houses along that podium base. The front door of each of those townhouses faced a garden and a volleyball court on the building’s third-story rooftop. Early on, McDowell noticed that the town house residents regularly played volleyball and socialized in that garden. He and his tower-living neighbours had every right to join in, but they never did. It was as though, by their proximity, the town house residents owned that space. “I just felt left out,” he told me.

So McDowell traded his high-status view apartment for one of the town houses. Within weeks his social landscape was transformed. He got to know all his new neighbours. He joined in the weekend cocktail and volleyball sessions in the shared garden.

He felt as if he had come home.

McDowell’s new neighbours were not inherently more likeable or friendly than his tower neighbours. So what had drawn them together? In some ways, their behaviour was predicted by decades of research into the sociology of place.

Design played a role. The front doors of The 501’s town houses all led to small porches a few steps above the podium garden. These porches were a soft zone, where people could hang out and chat without a formal invitation.

Without realizing it, McDowell and his neighbours were testing out a law of social geometry identified by Danish urbanist Jan Gehl. In studying the way people in Denmark and Canada behave in their front yards, Gehl found that residents chat the most with passersby when yards are shallow enough to allow for conversation, but deep enough to allow for retreat. As it turns out, geometry can help us meet our fundamental need to control our interactions with others. If we can chat with neighbours without having to make a date or invite them in for dinner, we actually chat more.

But the social dividends McDowell experienced were also a result of scale. We may be social creatures, but it takes a tremendous amount of brain power to keep track of who we can and cannot trust to be part of our social world. We are constantly making complex yet unconscious trust calculations. The evolutionary anthropologist Robin Dunbar suggested that most of us only have the capacity to keep up with our assessments of about 150 people.

So when McDowell went from bumping into any one of 300 strangers each day in the tower elevator, to regular contact with fewer than two dozen neighbours, his local social world became more manageable. Reaching out to his neighbours at that scale was simply a better investment.

This is not to say that we need to be on friendly terms with all our neighbours. But it offers a clue to why McDowell’s local social scene suddenly blossomed after he moved down from his own tower.

Nine years later, McDowell told me he could remember the names of everyone who passed his door. These new friendships are not trivial. Now McDowell babysits his neighbours’ kids and keeps spare keys for their front doors. His fellow town house dwellers dominate the building’s management board. They vacation together. They are supporting his campaign for a seat on city council. He considers half of his 22 town house neighbors to be close friends.

“How many of them would you say you love?” I asked him the afternoon he showed me around. It was an intrusive question. He blushed, but counted on his fingers.

“Love, like they were my family? Six.” This is a stunning figure, given the shrinkage that most people report in their social networks over the past 30 years. (The average American reports having two or fewer close confidants, including close family members.)

The lesson for anyone concerned about neighbourliness is that design really matters. We cannot be forced together. The richest social environments are those in which people feel free to edge closer to each other or move apart as we wish. When design offers clusters where we can hive off into smaller groups, we may stand a greater chance of connecting and building those powerful networks of local trust.

This does not mean that we need to stop building apartment towers. Many people thrive in residential towers. But it does mean we need to be more bold and experimental. We need to transcend our lazy reliance on the polar opposites of towers and single-family homes. We need to experiment with all forms of density; from townhouses, to courtyard clusters, to co-housing and other forms we’ve never seen before.

Cities have, for too long, served to push us apart. But nothing matters more to urban happiness and health than social relationships. We need to build for conviviality.